Blank page_ _ _ GI~ -cTHE CAMBRIDGE HISTORY

OF ENGLISH LITERATURE VOLUME XII THE NINETEENTH CENTURY ICAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS C. F. CLAY, MANAGER ~Lonbon:- FETTER LANE, E.C. eIbinburgb: ioo PRINCES STREET ipariz: THE GALIGNANI LIBRARY Jftrabap, Calcutta aub ~Eabraz: MACMILLAN AND CO., LTD. Toronto: J. M. DENT AND SONS, LTD. gakpo: THE MARUZEN-KABUSHIKI-KAISHA Copyrighted in the United States of America by G. P. PUTNAM'S SONS, 2, 4 AND 6, WEST 45TH STREET, NEW YORK CITY

A ll rights reset-vedTHE

CAMBRIDGE

HISTORY

OF

ENGLISH LITERATURE EDITED BY SIR A. W. WARD, LITT.D., F.B.A., Master of Peterhouse AND A. R. WALLER, M.A., Peterhouse VOLUME XII THE NINETEENTH CENTURY I

CAMBRIDGE: at the University Press 1915Camtibg e: PRINTED BY JOHN CLAY, M.A AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESSPREFACE

rFHE last three volumes of this History will deal with the literature of the nineteenth century as a whole, it being understood that living authors do not fall within the scope of our work. Though the present volume is published in advance of volumes xmii and xiv, it is not to be regarded as in any other respect separated from them. In the case of chapters treating of subjects more or less outside the range of what is usually included in a history of literature, we have endeavoured, in gathering up several threads, to complete the subject in so far as it could be completed in a single chapter, without observing what might be deemed to be the chronological limits of the particular volume-for example, in the present volume, the Oxford movement, the growth of liberal theology and the sections devoted to scholarship of various kinds. On the other hand, we have not scrupled to assign distinct portions of the same general subject -ancient and modern history, for instance-to different volumes. We hope to publish volumes xIII and xiv together, with as little delay as possible; but, under existing circumstances, we cannot bind ourselves to a definite date. In more ways than one, the war has delayed the appearance of the present volume. The University Press has been working under great difficulties, caused by the part taken by a very large proportion of its members in the service of the country. We have been deprived of the cooperation of Mr H. V. Routh; two chapters which he had kindly undertaken to write for the last volumes have had to be placed in other hands, in consequence of his absence at the front. a 3vi

Preface

With the exception of a few bibliographies in the present volume, we have been obliged to forgo the careful services of Mr A. T. Bartholomew, considerations of health compelling him to limit his labours. The History and several contributors to it have been much indebted to his assistance in the past. Mr G. A. Brown's help has been as valuable as usual, and we hope he may be able to continue it to the end of the work. We owe many thanks to Professor J. G. Robertson, of the University of London, for kindly looking over some bibliographies in the present volume more particularly concerned with the productions of continental literatures; to Canon S. L. Ollard, for the bibliography of the chapter on the Oxford movement; and to Mr Stephen Wheeler for generous help in the Landor bibliography. Our last two volumes will contain chapters on education, scientific writers, daily, weekly and university journalism and changes in the language, besides an account of Irish, and short summaries of Anglo-Indian, Canadian, Australian and South African, literature, in addition to sections on later nineteenth century writers. A. W. W. A. R. W. 2 August 1915CONTENTS CHAPTER I SIR WALTER SCOTT By T. F. HENDERSON, LL.D., St Andrews PAGE The Scottish literary revival of the eighteenth century. Scott's relations with the past. His early years. His German studies. Ballad poetry. Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border. The Lay of the Last Minstrel. Marmion. The Lady of the Lake. Rokeby. Scott's lyrics. Scott and Byron. Border Antiquities. The Waverley Novels. Scenic arrangement. The sweep and compass of his narrative. The characters in his novels. His treatment of love. His humour. His historical inaccuracies. His style. The influence of his work.......... 1 CHAPTER II BYRON By F. W. MOORMAN, B.A. (Lond.), Ph.D. (Strassburg), Assistant Professor of English Language and Literature in the University of Leeds Early years. Departure from England. Life at Venice and Ravenna. The Liberal. Life at Pisa and Genoa. Death at Mesolonghi. Hours of Idleness. English Bards and Scotch Reviewers. Childe Harold. The Verse-tales. Dramatic works. Lyrics. Beppo. The Fision of Judgment. Don Juan.... 31 CHAPTER III SHELLEY By C. H. HERFORD, Litt.D., Trinity College, Professor of English Literature in the University of Manchester Quteen Mlab. Alastor. Laon and Cythna. Prometheus Unbound. The Cenci. Peter Bell the Third. des. s Epipsychidion. Adonais. The Defence of Poetry. The Triumph of Life. Summary....... 57viii Contents CHAPTER IV KEATS By C. H. HERFORD PAGE Early years. Endymion. Isabella. Letters. Hyperion. The Eve of St Agnes. La Belle Dame Sans Merci. Lamia. Odes. Sonnets. Summary..... 79 CHAPTER V LESSER POETS, 1790-1837 ROGERS, CAMPBELL, MOORE AND ()THERS By GEORGE SAINTSBURY, M.A., Merton College, Oxford, LL.D., D.Litt., F.B.A., sometime Professor of Rhetoric and English Literature in the University of Edinburgh Rogers. Campbell. The Pleasures of Hope. Moore. Irish Melodies. Lalla Rookh. Hartley Coleridge. Thomas Hood. The Plea of the Midsummer Fairies. Winthrop Mackworth Praed. Sir Henry Taylor. Philip van Artevelde. George Darley. Thomas Lovell Beddoes. Death's Jest Booh. Charles Jeremiah Wells. Joseph and his Brethren. Richard H. Horne. Charles Whitehead. Thomas Wade. James and Horace Smith. Rejected Addresses. Richard Harris Barham. The Ingoldsby Legends. Poetesses. Joanna Baillie. Mrs Hemans. L.E.L. Sara Coleridge. Henry James Pye. William Sotheby. John Abraham Heraud. Robert Pollok. Robert Montgomery. Bryan Waller Procter (Barry Cornwall). Thomas Haynes Bayly. Robert Bloomfield. John Clare. John Bampfylde. John Leyden. Robert Stephen Hawker. William Barnes. Bernard Barton. James Montgomery. Ebenezer Elliott. Henry Kirke White. Henry Francis Cary. Charles Wolfe. Reginald Heber.... 95 CHAPTER VI REVIEWS AND MAGAZINES IN THE EARLY YEARS OF THE NINETEENTH CENTURY By the Hon. ARTHUR R. D. ELLIOT, M.A., Trinity College, Hon. D.C.L. (Durham), sometime editor of The Edinburgh Review The Edinburgh Review. Jeffrey. Brougham. The Quarterly Review. Gifford. Scott. Lockhart. Croker. Blackwood's Magazine. Lockhart. Wilson. Hogg. Maginn. Noctes Ambrosianae. The London Magazine. De Quincey's Opium Eater. Lamb's Roast Pig. The New Monthly Magazine.... 140Contents

1X

CHAPTER VII HAZLITT By W. D. HOWE, Professor of English in the University of Indiana, U.S.A. PAGE Hazlitt's early years. His later life. His work as a critic. His dramatic criticism. His writings on art. His quotations. His influence............. 164

CHAPTER VIII LAMB By A. HAMILTON THOMPSON, M.A., F.S.A., St John's College

Lamb's early days and friendships. Mary Lamb. Charles Lloyd. Tales from Shakespear. Specimens of English Dramatic Poets. Contributions to periodicals. The Essays of Elia. Letters. His later life. Summary.

180

CHAPTER IX THE LANDORS, LEIGH HUNT, DE QUINCEY By GEORGE SAINTSBURY Walter Savage Landor's prose and verse. His classicism. Gebir. Count Julian. Hellenics. Imaginary Conversations. Landor as a critic. Leigh Hunt's influence. His merits and defects. De Quincey's mastery in ornate prose. Robert Eyres Landor. 204 CHAPTER X JANE AUSTEN By HAROLD CHILD, sometime Scholar of Brasenose College, Oxford Early tales. Pride and Prejudice. Sense and Sensibility. Northanger Abbey. Mansfield Park. Emma. Persuasion... 231x

Contents

CHAPTER XI LESSER NOVELISTS By HAROLD CHILD PAGE Susan Edmondstone Ferrier. Catherine Grace Gore. Thomas Henry Lister. Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley. Frankenstein. Catherine Crowe. The Night Side of Nature. George Croly. G. P. R. James. W. H. Ainsworth. Marryat. Theodore Hook. John Galt. Moir's Mansie W^auch..... 245 CHAPTER XII THE OXFORD MOVEMENT By the Ven. W. H. HUTTON, B.D., Archdeacon of Northampton, Canon of Peterborough and Fellow of St John's College, Oxford Keble. R. H. Froude. Tracts for the Times. Newman at St Mary's. Tract 90. Ward's The Ideal of a Christian Church. Newman joins the Roman Catholic church. Pusey. Keble's Christian Year. Isaac Williams. Newman's Apologia pro vita sua. The Dream of Gerontius. His later works. Dean Church. Trench. Liddon. Neale. The Mozleys. Hook. The Wilberforces. Wiseman. Manning. Pollen. Faber. Dalgairns. W. G. Ward. de Lisle. Dolben. F. E. Paget.... 253 CHAPTER XIII THE GROWTH OF LIBERAL THEOLOGY By the Rev. F. E. HUTCHINSON, M.A., Trinity College, Oxford, formerly Chaplain of King's College The Evangelicals. The Clapham sect. The influence of Coleridge. Erskine of Linlathen. The noetics. Whately. Hampden. Thomas Arnold. Frederick Denison Maurice. Robertson of Brighton. The Broad Churchmen. Jowett. Stanley. Essays and Reviews. Robertson Smith. Ecce Homo. Westcott and Hort. Lightfoot. T. H. Green. Martineau. Father Tyrrell.. 279Contents

xi

CHAPTER XIV HISTORIANS WRITERS ON ANCIENT AND EARLY ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY By Sir A. W. WARD, Litt.D., F.B.A., Master of Peterhouse PAGE The influence of Niebuhr. Arnold's Roman History. Merivale's Romans under the Empire. Long's Decline of the Roman Republic. Thirlwall and Grote. Finlay's History of Greece. Freeman. George Rawlinson. Smith's Dictionaries. Milman's Latin Christianity. Arthur Penrhyn Stanley. William Bright. Hodgkin's Italy and her Invaders... 300 CHAPTER XV SCHOLARS, ANTIQUARIES AND BIBLIOGRAPHERS By Sir JOHN EDWIN SANDYS, Litt.D., F.B.A., Fellow of St John's College and Public Orator in the University of Cambridge Greek Scholars. Latin Scholars. Classical Archaeologists. Oriental Scholars. English Scholars. Archaeological Antiquaries. Literary Antiquaries. Bibliographers... 323 Bibliographies. 372 Supplementary Bibliography: Relations of English and Continental Literatures in the Romantic Period... 524 Table of Principal Dates.... 528

Index of Namnes

531Blank pageCHAPTER I

SIR WALTER SCOTT LIKE Burns, Scott is, in his way, an anomaly in English literature. Both as poet and novelist, he bore the badge of singularity. It was as poet that he made his first appeal to the world, and his poetic tendencies were not directly inspired by modern English verse. In matter and manner, if not in metrical form, his poetry has as little kinship with that of his immediate English predecessors as has the verse of Burns. His relations are more intimate with ancient, than with modern, bards, though not with the same bards as Burns; and, like him, he is very specifically -though not so peculiarly and completely-Scottish. His immense interest in the Scottish past represents a phase of the reaction against the ecclesiastical obsession of previous generations. With the advent of the reformation, Scotland's interest in her secular past was, for a long time, almost extinguished. Even the memories of Bannockburn and of her stern struggles for national independence became obscured by the new protestant alliance with England; while her catholic past acquired, in the eyes of the majority of the nation, a kind of criminal aspect from its supposed association with a long period of 'idolatry' and spiritual decline. One of the most marked features of the Scottish literary revival of the eighteenth century was the awakened interest in her secular past. This was further accentuated by the romantic, though futile, Jacobite risings. Scott inherited strong Jacobite partialities, and, through his father and others, was brought into close contact with Jacobite traditions; while the feats of his old border ancestry captivated the imagination of his early childhood. Interest in the past, and specially in the feudal and chivalric past, was the predominant inspiration of his verse; and conferred on it a marked dissimilarity from that of his immediate predecessors.

E. L. XII. CH. I.

12

Sir f[1alter Scott

[CH.

As a novelist, his distinctiveness largely depends, also, on his historic and antiquarian enthusiasms. Here, it is true, his relations with his immediate literary predecessors were much more intimate. Though his tales derive something of their romantic flavour from his familiarity with the older romance writers-both in prose and verse-he was also much advantaged by the antecedence of the great eighteenth century novelists and later and lesser novelists. He himself described Fielding as 'the father of the English novel'; he had a very strong admiration for Smollett; and he also confessed that, but for the success attained by Maria Edgeworth in her Irish tales, he might never have thought of attempting a novel of Scottish life. His prefaces to Ballantyne's Novelists' Library, also, show, as Lockhart remarks, 'how profoundly he had investigated the principles and practices of those masters before he struck out a new path for himself.' But, while more dependent as novelist than as poet on the stimulus and guidance of his modern predecessors, he was a much greater, a much more outstanding, novelist than poet. Here, he discovered his true literary vocation. Here, he found scope for a more complete and varied exercise of his special accomplishments and genius; and, great as were the merits of his chief eighteenth century predecessors, he was able to compass achievements, in some essential respects markedly different from theirs, and, at the same time, so comprehensive and manysided as to confer on him a peculiar lustre. The special literary development of Scott, while the consequence of a rare combination of natural gifts, was, also, largely influenced by certain exceptional circumstances which gave it its original impulse and did much to determine its character. He owed not a little to his Edinburgh nativity and citizenship. His 'own romantic town,' uniquely picturesque and variously associated with pregnant memories of the past, was an exceptionally suitable cradle for his genius. Long familiarity never lessened its fascination for him. 'No funeral hearse,' writes Lockhart, 'crept more leisurely than did his landau up the Canongate or Cowgate, and not a queer tottering gable but recalled to him some long-buried memory of splendour or bloodshed, which, by a few words, he set before the hearer in the reality of life. His image is so associated in my mind with the antiquities of his native place that I cannot now revisit them without feeling as if I were treading on his gravestone.' He was also favoured, in no small degree, by his border descent and prepossessions and an early literary nurture on border tales and ballads. It was this that gave the first impulse and directionI]

Early Literary Proclivities

3

to his poetic genius; and it formed, in a sense, the basis of his future literary achievements. His interest in the stirring border past was awakened in his early childhood principally by the vivid reminiscences of his grandmother, 'in whose youth,' he says, 'the old border depredations were matter of recent tradition,' and who used to tell him 'many a tale of Watt of Harden, Wight Willie of Aikwood and Jamie Telfer of the Fair Dodhead and other heroes-merry men all of the persuasion and calling of Robin Hood and little John.' The solitary condition of his childhood, caused by his lameness, begat, also, precocious literary proclivities which, otherwise, might have lain much longer in abeyance, or might have been largely obstructed by his strong partiality for outdoor activities. It made him, as he modestly puts it, 'a tolerable reader,' his enthusiasm, he remarks, being 'chiefly awakened by the wonderful and the terrible,' 'the common taste,' he adds, 'of children but in which I have remained a child unto this day.' In this respect, however, he was no more an ordinary child than he was an ordinary man. The stories he read produced an exceptionally deep impression on him, and called into early exercise his imaginative faculty. While he was still at the High school of Edinburgh, his tales, on days when play was made impossible by the severity of the weather, used 'to assemble an admiring audience round Lucky Brown's fire side'; and his interest in the marvellous became rather more than less absorbing as he approached manhood. After he became a legal apprentice in his father's office, his strong predilection for 'romantic lore' caused him to spend a portion of his earnings on attendance twice a week at an Italian class, and, for the same reason, he 'renewed and extended' his 'knowledge of the French language.' Later, he was accustomed, every Saturday in summer, and, also, during holidays, to retire with a friend to one of the neighbouring heights, where, perched in solitude, they read together 'romances of Knight errantry, the Castle of Otranto, Spenser, Ariosto and Boiardo being great favourites.' He, also, he tells us, 'fastened like a tiger upon every collection of old songs and romances' which chanced to fall in his way; and had a wonderful faculty of retaining in his memory whatever pleased him, 'above all a Border ballad.' While it was by the border tales and ballads that his romantic ardour was first aroused, it was, also, his ballad enthusiasm that induced him to make his first venture in publication; and, in ballad composition and translation, in ballad collection, annotation and amendment, he served a literary apprenticeship which proved 1-24

Sir JIalter Scott

[CH.

to be of cardinal advantage to him both as poet and as novelist. Shortly after he left the High school, his interest in old ballads received an abiding stimulus from bishop Percy's Reliques of Ancient Poetry, which he read, he says, 'with a delight which may be imagined but cannot be described.' It was their romantic stimulus that roused his curiosity about the old romantic poetry not only of England but of France and Italy; and, through his German studies, begun in 1792, his ballad fervour received further quickening by his introduction to the modern balladry of German poets, whose interest in this form of verse was, also, first aroused by the Reliques of Percy. In the same year in which he began his German studies, he had, under the guidance of sheriff substitute Shortrede, made the first of his seven successive annual raids into the wild and primitive district of Liddesdale, to explore the remains of old castles and peels, to pick up such samples as were obtainable of 'the ancient riding ballads,' to collect other relics of antiquity and to enjoy 'the queerness and the fun' associated with the rough hospitality of those unsophisticated regions. The special attention he was now directing to the old minstrelsy of the borders quickened and enlightened his appreciation of modern German balladry, his interest in which was first awakened in 1794, through the reports of Mrs Barbauld's recital, in the house of Dugald Stewart, of Taylor's translation of Burger's Leonore. Moved by the eulogies of several who had listened to it, he obtained from Hamburg a copy of Burger's works, when, he tells us, the perusal of the ballad in German 'rather exceeded,' than disappointed, his expectations. In his enthusiasm, he immediately promised a friend a verse translation of it, which, in 1796, he published in a thin quarto along with that of Der wilde Jiger. For his own gratification, he then 'began,' he says, 'to translate on all sides,' but, while the dramas of Goethe, Schiller and others 'powerfully attracted him'-so much so that, in 1799, he published a translation of Goethe's Goetz von Berlichingen-the ballad poetry, he affirms, was his 'favourite.' He was affected mainly by a particular form or aspect of the German romantic movement. It appealed to him so far as it harmonised with predilections which had been created independently of it. It widened and deepened his previous interest in the chivalric past and the marvels and diablerie of tradition, but he had nothing in common with its metaphysical, mystical and extravagant tendencies. It was more especially to its balladry that he was indebted, and this chiefly for directing his attention7 77 7 N



IJ Ba/lad - roetry 5 more distinctly and seriously to this form of verse, and causing him to essay experiments which were a kind of preparation for the accomplishment of his poetical romances. From the translation of German ballads, he acquired, he says, sufficient confidence to attempt the imitation of them. In his experiments, he now, also, received encouragement and counsel from 'Monk' Lewis, his acquaintanceship with whom 'rekindled effectually,' he says, in his breast, 'the spark of poetical ambition,' and to whom he was indebted for salutary corrections of his careless tendencies in regard to rime and diction, partly caused by his familiarity with the rude ballads of tradition. Lewis accepted certain of his ballads for his projected Tales of Wonder, which, however, did not appear until 1801; and, owing to the delay in the publication of the volume, Scott induced his old schoolfellow James Ballantyne, who had a printer's business at Kelso, to throw off, in 1799, a dozen copies of his own ballads, which, in pamphlet form, and under the title Apology for Tales qf Terror, he distributed among his more intimate Edinburgh friends. This small pamphlet was the beginning of business relations with Ballantyne which were to exercise a cardinal influence both on Ballantyne's and on Scott's fortunes. So pleased was Scott with this specimen of his friend's press that he promised to him the printing of a volume of old border ballads, should such a project take shape. It not only did so, but in a more comprehensive and elaborate form than he had at first contemplated. While it was still under consideration, he received, in 1799, an appointment to the sheriffdom of Selkirkshire. This marked a still more important turning-point in his life. It determined his permanent local connection with the border; and, meanwhile, it multiplied his opportunities for the acquisition of old border lore and for augmenting his topographical knowledge of the district. An acquaintanceship now formed with Richard Heber, also, greatly aided him in his medieval studies; and he received valuable suggestions from the remarkable young borderer, John Leyden, to whom, and, also, to William Laidlaw, his future steward, and to James Hogg, he was further indebted for several ballad versions. The collection appeared in 1802 in two volumes; and a third volume, which included ballad imitations by himself, Lewis and others, was published in 1803. In subsequent editions, changes were made in the ballad texts, by way both of amendment and of additions, the arrangement was altered and the notes were improved and supplemented. Though entitled Minstrelsy of the6

Sir Jyalter Scott

[CH.

Scottish Border, it included ballads and other pieces which had no special connection with the borders either of Scotland or England. According to Motherwell, forty-three poems were published for the first time; but a few of these were forgeries by Surtees; some were not properly ballads; several had appeared as broadsides; and others were accessible in manuscript collections. Nearly all those detailing border feats or incidents, or misfortunes, were, however, previously unknown outside the border communities; and it is to Scott and his coadjutors that we are indebted for the rescue from gradual oblivion of such fragments and rude versions of them as were still retained in vanishing tradition. Most of the versions published by Scott were of a composite character. Unlike Percy, he obtained several traditional copies-often differing widely in phraseology-of most of the ballads; and he constructed his versions partly by selecting what he deemed the best reading of each; partly by amending the more debased diction, or the halting rhythm, or the imperfect rime, partly by the fabrication of lines, and even stanzas, to replace omissions, or enhance the dramatic effect of the ballad. In some cases, as in that of Kinmont Willie, fragmentary recitals were merely utilised as little more than suggestions for the construction of what was practically a new ballad, inspired by their general tenor; and large portions of other ballads, as in the striking instance of Otterbourne, were very much a mere amalgam of amended and supplemented lines and phrases, welded into poetic unity and effectiveness by his own individual art. The publication of Minstrelsy led, gradually, to a more critical enquiry into the genesis and diffusion of the ancient ballad. By collecting several versions of many ballads and preserving them at Abbotsford, Scott helped to supply data towards this enquiry; while his introductions and notes tended to awaken a more scientific curiosity as to the sources of ballad themes, the connection of the ballad with old tales and superstitions and its relation to other forms of ancient literature. The reconstruction and amendment of old ballads brought Scott still more completely under the spell of the ancient Scottish past, and, also, helped not a little to discipline and enrich his poetic art. Little more than the rudiments of poetic art were manifested in his earlier ballad imitations. While, like the ballads of Burger, they suffer from a too close endeavour to reproduce the form and spirit of the ancient ballad, they, also, though displaying glimpses of poetic power, are often a little rough and uneven in their style andI] The Lay of the Last Minstrel

7

expression; and, while they come short of the dramatic force and vividness of Burger's ballads, they manifest nothing of the modern creative adaptation of the ancient ballad art brilliantly displayed in the ballads of Schiller and Goethe. But, what we have specially to notice is that they contain nothing comparable to the best stanzas of the amended Minstrelsy versions, and that none of them possesses the condensed tragic effectiveness of, for example, his own short ballad Albert Graeme in The Lay of the Last Minstrel (1805). The production of this long romantic poem was the more immediately important consequence of Scott's ballad studies. It may almost be described as a kind of prolonged and glorified border ballad. While on the outlook for a subject which might be made the theme of a romance, 'treated with the simplicity and wildness of an ancient ballad,' he received from the countess of Dalkeith a border legend of Gilpin Horner, with the suggestion that he might compose a ballad on it. He had then just finished the editing of the old metrical romance Sir Tristrem, and he had also been much struck by the casual recital to him of Coleridge's Christabel, as yet unpublished. What he, therefore, at first contemplated was, according to Lockhart, to throw the story of Gilpin into a somewhat similar cadence, so that he might produce such an echo of the late metrical romance as would serve to connect his conclusion of the primitive Sir Tristrem with his imitation of the common popular ballad in The Gray Brother and The Eve of St John. But, when he began shaping the story, it assumed, partly through the hints and suggestions of friends, the form of a romance divided into cantos, sung or recited by an aged minstrel to the duchess of Buccleugh and her ladies in the state room of Newark castle. The resort to the minstrel-whose personality, circumstances, temperament and moods are finely indicated in sympathetic stanzas at the beginning of the poem and, incidentally, between the cantos-was a specially happy inspiration. The poem being a minstrel recitation, a certain minstrel simplicity is maintained throughout; and, while an antique charm thus pervades its general method and manner, the recitation is preserved from the monotony of the old romances by substituting for the archaic romance stanzas an irregular and plastic metrical form. This 'mescolanza of measures,' as Scott terms it, was previously known to him as used by Anthony Hall, Anstey, Wolcot and others. He was indebted to Coleridge for the suggestion of its adaptability to8 Sir JIalter Scott [CH. more serious narrative verse; but The Lay, apart from the metre, has little in common with the fantastic fairy romance of Christabel. The rhythmical advantage of the metrical scheme consists in the fact that the length of the line is determined not by syllables but by accents. While it is limited to four accents, the number of the syllables may vary from seven to twelve. In a long narrative poem this, in itself, was a great antidote to monotony; and with it was conjoined the intermixture of couplet stanzas with others in which the couplet is varied with alternate or woven rime. In the case of Scott, the use of the metrical scheme was modified by the influence of the old ballad verse, of the old romance stanzas and of the verse forms of the old Scottish poets, which conferred, imperceptibly, perhaps, to himself, a certain antique flavour on the form, as well as the substance, of his poem. From the immense poetic licence which this 'mescolanza of measures' affords, success in its use, even in a strictly metrical sense, depends, also, in a very special way, on the independent individual art of the poet. The goblin pranks of Gilpin Horner were declared by Jeffrey to be the capital deformity of the poem; but, if these interludes add neither to its poetic nor romantic charm, they are (a point overlooked by the adverse critics) an essential part of what plot there is, since the combat which forms the climax of the poem depends upon the decoying of young Buccleugh and his falling into English hands. Again, the goblin story was Scott's original theme; and he could hardly have paid a more appropriate compliment to the lady to whom he was indebted for it than by making it the occasion of creating the series of striking episodes which he has linked with the annals of the house of Scott. The sequence of old border scenes and incidents is elaborated with an admirable combination of antique lore, clan enthusiasm and vividly picturesque art. Necessarily, the presentation is a selective, a poetical, a more or less idealised, one. The ruder and harsher aspects of the old border life are ignored. Apart, also, from imaginary occurrences, some liberty has been taken with historical facts, and the chronology, here and there, is a little jumbled; but, the main point is that the poetic tale, while reasonably accordant with known facts, is, on the whole, instinct with imaginative efficacy and artistic charm. While Scott's border prepossessions may, as has been objected, have enticed him, here and there, into details that are caviare to the general reader-and it may be granted that the prosaic recital of the savage combat by which theI]

The Lay and Marmion

9

Scotts of Eskdale won their land is an irrelevant interruption of the main story-these 'local partialities,' though not quite excusable, are not prominent enough strongly to offend, as Jeffrey feared, 'the readers of the poem in other parts of the empire. Again, though certain critics may be so far right in pronouncing canto vI a kind of superfluity-for the fine description of the wailing music of the harper's requiem would have formed an admirable conclusion-the superfluity may well be forgiven in the case of a canto including, to mention nothing further, the rapturous pathetic invocation with which it opens, the consummately successful ballad adaptation Albert Graeme, the more elaborately beautiful song of the English bard Fitztraver, the graphic and pathetic Rosabelle and the pilgrim mass in Melrose abbey, with the impressive English version of Dies Irae. Scott himself says that 'the force in The Lay is thrown on style, in Marmion on description'; but the dictum must be interpreted in a somewhat loose sense. Notwithstanding many felicities and beauties, the style in The Lay, as in Marmnion, is often careless. Owing, partly, to his overflowing energy and his emotional absorption in his subject, of which he was practically master before he began to write, he was a great, an almost matchless, improvisator; he created his impression more by the ardour and vividness of his presentation than by the charm of a subtle and finished art. The Lay being, however, his first poetic venture on a large scale, he necessarily had to give special attention to its poetic form and manner, and this all the more because it was a quite novel kind of poetic venture. He had to devise a metrical scheme for it, and, having elected that the story should be told by a minstrel, he had to preserve throughout a certain minstrel directness and simplicity. But, if The Lay be more carefully written than Marmrion, it is rather more archaic and not so directly potent. Notwithstanding The Lay's pleasant antique flavour and the quaintly interesting personality of the minstrelfor whom the introductory epistles to each canto of Marmion, however excellent in themselves, are by no means a happy substitute Marmion has the advantage of being less imitative and artificial in its manner and more unrestrainedly effective. The metrical scheme is a kind of modification of that of The Lay. The rhythm is less irregular, the couplets being generally octosyllabic; and couplets bulk more largely than interwoven stanzas, the former being usually employed for the simple narrative, and the latter for the more descriptive passages. Marmion, also, conjures10

Sir [talter Scott

[CH.

up a more striking, varied and pregnant series of scenes than does The Lay. The past depicted is not specifically a border, but a partly Scottish and partly English, past. As he himself tells us, it is an attempt 'to paint the manners of feudal times on a broader scale and in the course of a more interesting story.' The love story-though, so far as concerns Constance, a far from pleasant one-is more poignantly interesting; and the story to which it is subordinate, the tragic national story of Flodden, is more profoundly moving than The Lay's chivalric combat. Lord Marmion, whose love concerns, diplomatic errand and final fate are the ostensible theme of the poem, is not, however, a very convincing or coherent portrait. 'The combination of mean felony with so many noble qualities in the character of the hero'however well it may have served to give occasion for the admirable pictures of the past which are the poem's most conspicuous feature-is, as Lockhart admits, 'the main blot in the poem.' It is a more serious blot than are the pranks of the goblin page in The Lay. It especially detracts from the poetic effectiveness of his death-scene, for the reader resents the distinction thus conferred on the double-hearted hero by the glowing and minute account of his individual fate when cardinal national issues are hanging in the balance. While the fortunes of Lord Marmion are, ostensibly, the main theme of the poem, he is, however, introduced merely to afford opportunity to paint the manners of the time in the year of Flodden. They are shown to us in association with the castle, the convent, the inn, the court, the camp and the battle. The force, as Scott says, is laid on description. The poem is very much a series of vivid kaleidoscopic scenes. It may suffice to mention the exquisite prospect of Norham castle illuminated by the setting sun; the description of Marmion's approach to it; the presentation of the voyage of the Whitby nuns along the rockbound Durham and Northumbrian coasts to St Cuthbert's holy isle; the trial and doom of Constance by the heads of the three convents in 'the dread vault' of Lindisfarne; the inn interior of the olden time with its host and guests; the approach towards Lord Marmion from the woodland shade of the lion king Sir David Lyndsay, on his milk-white palfrey, attended by his heralds and pursuivants on their prancing steeds and all clothed in their gorgeous heraldic bravery; the picture of the mighty mass of Crichton castle dominating 'the green vale of Tyne'; and the presentation of the white pavilions of the great and motley Scottish army on the Borough muir backed by the turrets andI] The Lady of the Lake 11 rocky heights of Edinburgh and the shining expanse of the firth of Forth. But the great descriptive triumph of the poem is the dramatic picture of the stress and tumult and varying fortunes of the Flodden conflict, to the last heroic stand of the Scots and their flight across the Tweed in the gathering darkness. With the description of the morrow's battlefield and of the discovery of the king's body, the poem might well have ended; for the story of Lord Marmion's burial, of Wilton's feats and of Clara's happy marriage is rather an anticlimax. While, in The Lay, the force, according to Scott, is laid on style, and, in Marmion, on description, in The Lady of the Lake (1810) it is laid on incident. The poem sets before us an almost continuous succession of exciting occurrences. It is not so much a re-creation of the past as a stirring recital of hazards and adventures. Nevertheless, it is as picturesquely descriptive as either of its two predecessors; and, apart from the vividly coloured incidents, it gains a special charm from the wild and enchanting scenery which forms their setting. The detailed obtrusiveness of the scenery has been objected to as too guidebook-like; but what would the poem, as a poem, be apart from the matchless reproduction of the scenery's enchantment? It was, in fact, the deep impression made on Scott by the mingled loveliness and wild grandeur of the loch Katrine region that suggested to him to make it the scene of such a theme. 'This poem,' he says, 'the action of which lay among scenes so beautiful and so deeply impressed on my recollection, was a labour of love.' Each canto begins with one or more Spenserian stanzas, mainly of an invocatory character; and, except for the interpolated songs or bard recitals, he confines himself, throughout his tale, almost wholly to the octosyllabic couplet. This has met with some disapproval; but the rapid succession of exciting incidents tends to prevent the monotony of effect that might have been felt in the case of a less animated narrative, the poem being almost destitute of such irksome passages as have been commented on in the case of its predecessors. It is the most uniformly and vividly entertaining of the three poems, and was, and seems destined to be, the most popular. If it cannot be termed great poetry, it is, for most readers, a very fascinating poetic tale. Though it may even verge, occasionally, on rodomontade, though its representations of personalities are rather slight and superficial and, in some instances, a little stagey, there is irresistible spirit and verve in the depiction of its incidents and much poetic charm12

Sir Wralter Scott

[CH.

in the arrangement of their setting. As for the interpolated songs, some, intended to represent the more voluminous improvisations of the highland bards, are but fairly successful Ossianic imitations; but the song of Ellen, Rest, Warrior, Rest, is a true romantic inspiration; ardent clan loyalty is consummately blended with savage warrior sentiment in the boat chorus Hail to the Chief; and it would be difficult to overpraise the condensed passion of the coronach. Of Rokeby (1813), Scott wrote to Ballantyne: 'I hope the thing will do, chiefly because the world will not expect from me a poem of which the interest turns upon character.' Of Bertram, the lusty villain of the poem, he also wrote to Joanna Baillie: He is a Caravaggio sketch, which I may acknowledge to you-but tell it not in Gath-I rather pride myself upon, and he is within the keeping of nature, though critics will say to the contrary. Lockhart questions whether, even in his prose, 'there is anything more exquisitely wrought out as well as fancied than the whole contrast of the two rivals for the love of the heroine in Rokeby'; and he also expresses the opinion that 'the heroine herself has a very particular interest in her.' At this, few, perhaps, will be disposed to cavil very much. Scott here gave the world a glimpse of a new aspect of his genius. In none of his previous poetic tales did he direct special attention to the portrayal of character. With the exception of Lord Marmion, who, at least, is an artistic, if not psychological, failure, his personalities are rather loosely sketched; in Rokeby, there is a much more elaborate indication of idiosyncrasies. It thus possesses a more pungent human interest than any of the three previous poems; the story, also, is better constructed and it abounds in thrilling and dramatic situations, all well devised and admirably elaborated; on the other hand, it is rather overburdened with mere sordidness and deficient in the finer elements of romance; it has neither the antique charm of The Lay, nor the national appeal of Marnmion, nor the captivating singularity of The Lady of the Lake. Of the scenery, Scott says, 'it united the romantic beauties of the wilds of Scotland and the rich and smiling aspect of the southern portion of the island.' And he had bestowed immense care on mastering its characteristic features; but, superior in rich, natural charms as is this Yorkshire country to most of southern Scotland, it lacks the mingled grandeur and bewitching loveliness of the loch Katrine region; and, in Rokeby Scott failed to utiliseI] The Lord of the Isles 13 it with anything of the same effectiveness. The incidents of Rokeby might have happened anywhere and at any period, as well after any other battle as that of Marston moor. No attempt is made to portray the characteristics of cavaliers or roundheads; and the historic interest of the poem is almost nil. In The Lord of the Isles (1818), again, the historic interest is supreme. Its main fault, as a poetic tale, is, in truth, that it is too strictly historical, too much a mere modern reproduction of Barbour's Bruce. The lurid Skye episode, however, is recorded with rare impressiveness, and the whole pageantry of the poem is admirably managed. Of the less important romances-The Vision of Don Roderick (1811), The Bridal of Triermain (1813) and Harold the Dauntless (1817)-little need be said. Though the first-founded on a Spanish legend and written on behalf of a fund for the relief of the Portuguese-bears more than the usual signs of hasty composition, the glowing enthusiasm of its martial stanzas largely atones for its minor defects. Of The Bridal of Triermain, fragmentary portions appeared in The Edinburgh Annual Register for 1813 as an imitation of Scott. By some, they were attributed to William Erskine, afterwards Lord Kinneder, and, at Erskine's request, Scott agreed to complete the tale, on condition that Erskine 'should make no serious effort to disown the composition, if report should lay it at his door.' To aid in the deception, Scott took care 'in several places to mix something which might resemble' his 'friend's feeling and manner'; and we must suppose that this was more particularly attempted in the Lucy introductions. The romance, a wondrous love story of the time of Arthur, is itself, also, in a more gentle and subdued key than is usual with Scott, and the airily graceful story of its scatheless marvels strongly contrasts with the potent and semiburlesque energy that animates the fierce and fearsome saga, Harold the Dauntless. Little importance attaches to any of Scott's dramatic effortsHalidon Hill (1822), Macduff's Cross (1822), The Doom of Devorgoil (1830) or The Tragedy of Auchindrane (1830)-which but serve to show that his genius or his training unfitted him to excel in this more concise form of imaginative art. As for his poetic romances, they might conceivably have gained by more careful elaboration and considerable condensation; but, on the other hand they might, by such a process, have lost much of their fire and spirit and naive picturesqueness. Their main charm lies in their vivid presentation of the exciting incidents and wondrousI4

Sir f alter Scott

[CH.

occurrences of former times, in association with their antique environment, with old surviving memorials of the past and with notably characteristic scenery. If their poetry be lacking in condensed effectiveness, in emotional depth and in the more exquisite beauties and splendours of imaginative art, it is generally admirably spirited, and it is almost unmatched for its brilliant pictures of adventure, pageantry and conflict. But, on the whole, it is, perhaps, as a lyric poet that Scott is seen to best advantage; though, even in Scotland, his lyric greatness has been rather overlooked. Here, he has been overshadowed by Burns, and he hardly deserves to be so. Necessarily, he was not a little indebted to the example of Burns, of whom he was one of the most ardent of admirers, and his minute acquaintance with Johnson's Musical Museum is, also, evident. But, if, here, he owes something to Burns, he was, in some respects, a close rival of him. He does not rival him as a love poet; but, if, also, in other respects, a much less voluminous writer of lyrics, he showed, perhaps, a more independent fertility, and his diversity is quite as remarkable. Various examples of his lyric art in his poetic romances have already been quoted; and, scattered throughout his novels, there are, also, many exquisite lyrical fragments and other incidental verse. Such purely English pieces as Brignal Banks; A Weary Lot; Rest, Warrior, Rest; Allan a Dale; County Guy; Waken Lords and Ladies Gay; Love Wakes and Weeps and Young Lochinvar have no parallel in Burns. Burns was almost devoid of romance-as, indeed, were generally the Scottish vernacular bards-except when, as in It was a' for our Richtfu' King, he borrowed the sentiment of a predecessor; nor could he have penned the tenderly mournful Proud Maisie. Of Scott's mastery of rollicking humour, we have at least one example in Donald Caird; his Bonnie Dundee, Pibroch of Donald Dhu and Macgregor's Gathering are unsurpassed as spirited martial odes; the mournful pathos of old age is finely expressed in The Sun upon the Weirdlaw Hill; and Rebecca's hymn When Israel of the Lord Beloved is a majestic summary of Jewish faith. From the time of the publication of The Lay, not only had Scott been by far the most popular poet of his time; his popularity was of an unprecedented character. But the great vogue of his verse was, of necessity, temporary. It was occasioned partly by its novelty, supplemented by the general reaction against the cold classicism of the eighteenth century. Furthermore, his verseI]

Scott and Byron

'5

represented a form of this reaction which appealed, more than any other contemporary verse, to the general reader. It revealed the more attractive aspects of the feudal and chivalric past with elaborate verisimilitude, and set forth its adventures and combats with rare dramatic vividness. But, if these recitals stirred the blood, they but faintly dealt with passion, they hardly appealed to the profounder emotions, they were an unimportant stimulus to thought, they did not very strongly thrill the soul, their romance was mainly of a reminiscent and partly archaic type, their imagination hardly ranged beyond the externals of the past. Excellent of its sort though his verse was, the scope of its influence was, thus, of a limited and superficial character; and, also, it became clear that Scott's vein was exhausted, even before his popularity was eclipsed by that of Byron, who, while partly borrowing his methods, applied them in a much more pungent fashion. Of Byron, Scott himself says: 'He beat me out of the field in description of the stronger passions and in deepseated knowledge of the human heart.' Whatever the exact degree of truth in this modest verdict of Scott, his recognition of his partial eclipse as a poet by Byron was a happy decision both for himself and the world. It definitely induced him to abandon the poetic tale for the novel; and, here, he attained a supremacy which, at least during his own generation, remained unchallenged, and, if, later, it was rivalled, has hardly yet been overthrown. His poetic romances, while originating in certain strong predilections specially fostered from his infancy, represented a mere fraction of his endowments, characteristics and accomplishments. His novels, on the contrary, afforded scope for the full exercise of his uncommon combination of natural gifts and acquirements, for his wholesome humour as well as his comprehensive sympathies, for the utilisation not merely of his historical and antiquarian lore but of his everyday experiences and his varied practical knowledge of human nature. They mirrored the writer himself more exactly and fully than others have been mirrored in their literary productions. On his novels he may be said to have lavished the whole of his mental resources, to have spent the stores of his reflections and observations, and to have bestowed the most precious resources of his extensive erudition. Before he began his career as novelist, he had reached his forty-third year; and the literary apprenticeship he had served as ballad collector and annotator, and poetic romanceSir Jalter Scott

[CH.

writer, was an invaluable preparative for the greater vocation of his late years. It had placed him in close relations with the past; it had kindled, instructed and trained his romantic imagination; it had stored his memory with countless interesting details which were pregnant with suggestions for his fictitious prose narratives and, in various ways, greatly enriched their texture. Nor is it possible to forget the insight into the spirit and temper of special historical periods acquired by him in the course of other literary undertakings. Among the more important works issued under his editorship were the Civil War Memoirs of Sir Henry Slingsby and captain Hodgson (1806); the Works of Dryden, with life and elaborate notes, 18 vols. (1808); the Military Memoirs (1672-1713) of George Carleton (1808); Sir Robert Cary's Memoirs (1808); Somers's Collection of Tracts, 13 vols. (1809); The Life, Letters and State Papers of Sir Ralph Sadler, 3 vols. (1809); The Secret History of James I, 2 vols. (1811); the Works of Jonathan Swift with life and notes, 19 vols. (1814); Memorie of the Somervilles (1814); and various other works in later years. In purely historical writings, Scott's imaginative genius found itself somewhat cramped. His Tales of a Grandfather (1827-9) only faintly mirror his gift of story-telling. As for his voluminous Life of Napoleon (1827), considering the circumstances in which it was written and the rapidity with which it was achieved, it is a remarkable tozir de force; but it cannot claim to be, in almost any respect, a satisfactory biography. On the other hand, his Border Antiquities of England and Scotland (1817) exhibits some of his most characteristic qualities. In compiling it, he gained a very minute mastery of the characteristics of ancient architecture and of the scenic features of a region teeming with ancient martial exploits and exciting adventures. Scott had a very keen eye for the picturesque features of ancient buildings and of their situation and surroundings. While still in his father's office, one of his chief recreations consisted of long country excursions on foot or on horseback, the principal object of which, he says, was 'the pleasure of seeing romantic scenery, or what afforded me at least equal pleasure, the places which had been distinguished by remarkable historical events'; and, though he modestly states that, while none delighted more than he in the general effect of picturesque scenery, he was unable with the eye of a painter to dissect the various parts of the scene, and, fromI]

Scenic Arrangement

7

some defects of eye or hand, was unable to train himself to make sketches of those places which interested him; yet, 'show me' he says, 'an old castle or a field of battle, and I was at home at once, filled it with its combatants in their proper costume and overwhelmed my hearers with the enthusiasm of my description.' He here touches on one of the cardinal idiosyncrasies of his imaginative productions. Their inspiration is derived partly from their scenes, and their fascination is greatly aided by his exceptional mastery of scenic arrangement. While possessing a minute knowledge of the exteriors and interiors of old keeps and castles, of ancient domestic habits and customs, of the modes of ancient combat, of antique military apparel and weapons and of the observances and pageantry of chivalry, he had, also, to obtain a particular setting, a definite environment, for his incidents before his imaginative genius could be adequately kindled; and an outstanding feature of his novels is the elaborate attention bestowed on what may be termed the theatre of his events. If, as he affirms, his sense of the picturesque in scenery was greatly inferior to his sense of the picturesque in action, he was yet, as he states, able, by very careful study and by 'adoption of a sort of technical memory,' regarding the scenes he visited, to utilise their general and leading features with all the effectiveness he desired. But, much more than this may be affirmed. 'Wood, water, wilderness itself;' had, he says, 'an unsurpassable charm' for him; and this charm he completely succeeds in communicating to his readers. His vivid portrayal of the external surroundings immensely enhances the effect of his narrative art; it greatly heightens its interest, and powerfully assists him in conveying a full sense of reality to the incidents he depicts. As an instance of his employment of a graphically minute description of surroundings to rouse and impress the reader's imagination, reference may be made to the masterly picture of the wildly desolate characteristics of the waste of Cumberland, through which Brown, in Guy Mannering, journeyed to find Dandie Dinmont engaged in a life and death struggle with the highway thieves. He also shows a special partiality for night scenes. There is, for example, the Glasgow midnight in Rob Roy, the attack on the Tolbooth in The Heart of Midlothian, the moonlight night in the beautiful highland valley, where Francis Osbaldistone, journeying to a supper and bed at Aberfoil, is overtaken by two horsemen, one of whom proves to be Diana

E. L. XII. CH. I.

2Sir FYalter Scott

[CH.

Vernon, and, later, is suddenly hailed by a touch on the shoulder from his mysterious friend, the escaped desperado Rob Roy, with the remark 'a braw nicht Maister Osbaldistone, we have met at the mirk hour before now'; the adventure of the Black Knight, who, shortly after twilight in the forest had almost deepened into darkness, chanced on the rude hut of that strange hermit the buxom friar Tuck; and the night of the snowstorm, in which Brown, after leaving the chaise, finds his way through the steep glen to the ruinous hut in which he discovers Meg Merrilies keeping lonely watch over the dying smuggler. But, indeed, generally, an outstanding feature of his romances is the almost magical art with which he conjures up the varied atmosphere and scenery of his events and incidents. Outward nature was the constant companion of his thoughts and feelings; he was familiar with its varied aspects; and, in his references to them in his romances, he shows an unerring instinct for what is appropriate for his purpose. Again, while employing an immense multiplicity of scenic effects, he is peculiarly lavish in his introduction of personages. His narrative, thus, has an immense sweep and compass. It is not sufficient that his tale should relate the fortunes of hero and heroine. They mainly assist in reviving a particular period of the past, or the chief features of a great historic drama, or the characteristics of certain ecclesiastical or political episodes. The journey, for example, and adventures of Waverley are merely a kind of pretext for a glimpse behind the scenes of the '45; Guy Mannering and Redgauntlet deal more particularly with the lawless aspects of southern Scotland shortly anterior to Scott's own time, interspersed with amusing pictures of the characteristic features of old legal Edinburgh; Old yMiortality mirrors the Scotland of the covenanting persecution; and The Fortunes of Nigel calls up the eccentric James VI and I, but, more particularly, the seamy side of his court and the ruffianly features of the London of his time. How instructively he contrives to give a national interest to his tale is especially seen in the case of The Heart of Midlothian. It is founded on the actual case of a young woman who made a journey to London on her sister's behalf, just as Jeanie Deans did, but, with this, he interweaves the striking story of the Porteous mob and the midnight attack on the Edinburgh Tolbooth, paints vivid pictures of old burgher Edinburgh, of old rustic Scottish life, of the stern Cameronians, of the old-world ScottishI]

Comprehensive Sympathies

I9

laird and his domestic affairs and of various Edinburgh reprobates, sets before us the ancient perils of the Great North road, introduces us to queen Caroline and the great duke of Argyll and his potent representatives, and describes the sovereign sway of the duke's factor, the great Knockdunder, in the west Highlands. In his creation of personages, Scott displays a fecundity resembling that of nature herself, a fecundity derived from his comprehensive acquaintanceship with all sorts and conditions of men. Like Burns, he at once placed himself on easy terms with everyone he met. His early raids into Liddesdale, for example, gave him a better insight into the characteristics of the border shepherds and farmers than most strangers could obtain, for the simple reason that he at once became intimate with them. The verdict of one of them, at first disposed to stand in awe of the Edinburgh advocate, was, so soon as Scott had spoken to him, 'he's just a chield like ourselves I think'; and this was the impression he produced in whatever circle he moved. He met everyone on terms of their common human nature; he mingled with his workmen without conveying any sense of patronage, he and they were at home with each other. On animals, he seemed to exercise, unconsciously, a mesmeric influence, founded on their instinctive trust in his goodwill; and a similar glamour, derived from his deep geniality, at once secured him the confidence and regard of nearly every person he met. 'I believe,' says Lockhart, 'Scott has somewhere expressed in print his satisfaction that, during all the changes of our manners, the ancient freedom of personal intercourse may still be indulged in between a master and an out-of-door's servant, but in truth he kept up the old fashion even with his domestic servants to an extent which I have hardly seen practised by any other gentleman. He conversed with his coachman if he sat by him, as he often did, on the box, with his footman if he happened to be in the rumble.... Any steady servant of a friend of his was soon considered as a sort of friend too, and was sure to have a kind little colloquy to himself at coming and going.' Referring to the bashful reluctance of Nigel to mix in the conversation of those with whom he was not familiar, Scott remarks: It is a fault only to be cured by experience and knowledge of the world which soon teaches every sensible and acute person the important lesson that amusement, and, what is of more consequence, that information and increase of knowledge are to be derived from the conversation of every individual whatsoever with whom he is thrown into a natural train of communication. For ourselves we can assure the reader-and perhaps if we have been able to 2-220

Sir fYalter Scott

[CH.

afford him amusement it is owing in a great degree to this cause-that we never found ourselves in company with the stupidest of all possible companions in a post-chaise, or with the most arrant cumber-corner that ever occupied a place in the mail-coach, without finding that in the course of our conversation with him we had some idea suggested to us, either grave or gay, or some information communicated in the course of our journey, which we should have regretted not to have learned, and which we should be sorry to have immediately forgotten.' Scott's curiosity as to idiosyncrasies, though kindly and well bred, was minute and insatiable; and it may further be noted that, for his study of certain types of human nature, he had peculiar opportunities from his post of observation as clerk to the court of session. Moreover, he was happily dowered with the power to combine strenuous literary and other labours with an almost constant round of social distractions. His mental gifts were splendidly reinforced by exceptional physical vigour, and, more particularly, by a nervous system so strongly strung that, for many years, it was not seriously disquieted by incessant studious application combined with an almost constant round of conviviality. To almost the last, it enabled him to perform prodigies of literary labour, even after it had begun to show serious signs of breaking up. Though it must be granted that the infesting of his border home by a constant influx of 'tourists, wonder hunters and all that fatal species,' was, even from monetary considerations-considerations the importance of which were, in the end, to be calamitously revealed-far from an unmixed blessing, it had certain compensations. If he occasionally found it needful-from the behests of literary composition-to escape from it, the social racket, on the whole, gave him more pleasure than boredom. Lockhart describes the society at Abbotsford as 'a brilliant and ever varying' one; and Scott, evidently, enjoyed its diversity; and, while responding to its brilliances, took quiet note of its follies and vanities. Though the 'daily reception of new comers' entailed more or less 'worry and exhaustion of spirit upon all the family,' he was himself, we are told, proof against this. The immense geniality of Scott, which qualified him for so comprehensive an appreciation of human nature, especially manifests itself in his method of representing character. His standpoint is quite the antipodes of that of Swift or Balzac. Mentally and morally, he was thoroughly healthy and happy; there was no taint of morbidity or bitterness in his disposition; and, if aspiring, he was so without any tincture of jealousy or envy. Though possessing potent satiric gifts, he but rarely hasi] Characters in his Novels 2 1 recourse to them. Generally his humour is of an exceptionally kindly and sunny character. He hardly ever-and only when, as in the case of the marquis of Argyll, his political prejudices are strongly stirred-manifests an unfairness that verges on spite. If a somewhat superficial, he is not a narrow, moralist. The existence of human frailties does not seriously oppress him; they appeal, many of them, as much to his sense of humour as to his judiciary temper. He shows no trace of the uneasy cynicism which greatly afflicted Thackeray; and, unlike many modern writers, he displays no absorbing anxiety to explore what they deem the depths of human nature and expose its general unsoundness. On the other hand, he is an expert exponent of its eccentricities and its comical qualities; and, if not one of the most profoundly instructive, he is one of the most wholesomely cheerful, of moralists. At the same time, he can admirably depict certain types of vulgarly ambitious scoundrels, such as the attorney Glossin in Guy Mrannering, and he has a keen eye for a grotesque hypocrite like Thomas Turnbull in Redgauntlet. Captain Dirk Hatterick is, also, a splendid ruffian, although a much less difficult portrait than that of captain Nanty Ewart of 'The Jumping Jenny' and his pathetic struggle between good and evil. On the other hand, his merely villainous creations, whether of the diabolically clever order like Rashleigh, or the somewhat commonplace sort of Lord Dalgarno, or the low and depraved kind of his eminence of Whitefriars-grossly impressive after a fashion though he beare all a little stagey. In historical characters, his outstanding successes are Louis XI and James VI and I. Here, of course, he had the advantage of having to deal with very marked idiosyncrasies; but this might well have been a snare to an inferior romancer. Scott's portraits of them may be more or less incorrect, but both are very masterly and vivid representations of very definite embodiments of peculiar royal traits. With them, he was much more successful than with Mary queen of Scots, whose stilted heroics do not impress us, and, here, he was handicapped by the conflict between his sympathies and his convictions. His strong cavalier bias, also, on other occasions proved a snare to him. For example, he outrageously exaggerates the sinister qualities of the marquis of Argyll; while his Montrose is a featureless and faultless hero, quite overshadowed in interest by captain Dugald Dalgetty. Claverhouse, againwhom, in Old Mortality, he rather infelicitously refers to as 'profound in politics,' and whom, inadvertently, he makes to22

Sir flkalter Scott

[CH.

figure there more as an arrogant coxcomb than as the high-hearted royalist he would wish him to be-is, in Wandering Willie's Tale, very impressively revealed to us as he appears in covenanting tradition. On the other hand, the fanaticism of Burley in Old Mortality is rather overdrawn: the stern indignation which prompted the murder of archbishop Sharp was not allied to any form of mental disorder. Still, if not historically correct, the picturesque luridness of the fanaticism which is ascribed to him is effectively set forth. Generally, it may be said that Scott is least successful with his more morally correct and least eccentric personages. He specially fails to interest us in his lovers-perfectly proper but rather buckram young men, with merely average commonplace characteristics. Of Waverley, he himself said: The hero is a sneaking piece of imbecility, and if he had married Flora, she would have set him up upon the chimney piece, as Count Borowlaski's wife used to do with him. As for the heroines, their main fault is their faultlessness; they do and say nothing that provokes criticism; and he is more careful that we should respect and admire than understand them. Catherine Seyton is clever, witty and sprightly. Diana Vernon is rendered interesting by her peculiar surroundings, and, though in a quite ingenuous fashion, verges on unconventionality. Julia Mannering, Lucy Bertram, Flora Maclvor, Edith Bellenden, Miss Wardour are all charming in a slightly different fashion from each other; but little more than the surface of their natures is revealed to us. On account of the peculiar prominence of the love episode in The Bride of Lammermoor, and its strong tragic characteristics, some have been inclined to pronounce this novel Scott's masterpiece; but, while the tragic painfulness of portions of the novel is undeniable, and no small art is shown in creating a general atmosphere of tragic gloom and conveying a sense of impending calamity, its tragic greatness is another matter. The chief personalities hardly possess the qualities needful for evoking the highest form of tragic pathos. The almost ludicrous subjection of Sir William to his masterful wife is a serious hindrance to the achievement of the desired effect; while, again, disgust at her besotted prejudice and narrow, stolid pride tends to prevent us from being roused to any other emotion as to its consequences. Then, Lucy Ashton is too weak to win our full sympathy; and her sudden lunacy and mad murderous act shock, rather than impress, us; while, on the other hand,I]

Love Episodes

23

Ravenswood is at once too readily conciliatory and too darkly fierce. And, even if the tragic elements were better compounded than they are, the novel, in other respects, is decidedly inferior to the best of his productions. It has very patent faultssufficiently accounted for by Scott's condition of almost perpetual torture when he wrote it-and, except in the case of the weird crones, displays less than his usual graphic felicity in the portrayal of Scottish characters, Caleb Balderstone, for example, being a rather wearisome caricature, and the wit expended on his ingenious devices to hide the extreme destitution of his master's larder being of the very cheapest kind. However admirably he could create a strong and thrilling situation, Scott, in the portrayal of love episodes, fails to interest his readers so much as do many less distinguished novelists. Here, he shows little literary kinship with Shakespeare, with whom he is sometimes compared, with whose influence he was in many respects strongly saturated, from whom he obtained important guidance in regard to artistic methods and whose example is specially apparent in some of his more striking situations. For his almost gingerly method of dealing with love affairs, the exceedingly conventional character of the Edinburgh society in which he moved may, in part, be held responsible. He had an inveterate respect for the stereotyped proprieties. By the time, also, that he began to write his prose romances, love, with him, had mellowed into the tranquil affection of married life. It was mainly in a fatherly kind of way that he interested himself in the amatory interludes of his heroes and heroines, who generally conduct themselves in the same invariably featureless fashion, and do not, as a rule, play a more important part in his narration than that of pawns in a game of chess. With him, romance was not primarily the romance of love, but the general romance of human life, of the world and its activities, and, more especially, of the warring, adventurous and, more or less, strange and curiosity-provoking past. For achieving his best effects, he required a period removed, if even a little less than 'sixty years since,' from his own, a period contrasting more or less strongly, but in, at least, a great variety of ways, with it; and he depended largely on the curiosity latent, if not active, in most persons, about old-time fashions, manners, modes of life, personal characteristics and, more especially, dangers and adventures. 'No fresher paintings of Nature,' says Carlyle, 'can be found24

Sir fYakter Scott

[CH.

than Scott's; hardly anywhere a wider sympathy with man'; but he affirms that, while Shakespeare fashions his characters from the heart outwards, your Scott fashions them from the skin inwards, never getting near the heart of them! The one set become living men and women, the other amount to little more than mechanical cases, deceptively painted automatons. Though a characteristically exaggerated pronouncement, it is undeniable that there is a soupfon of truth in it. Scott would have been the last to liken himself to Shakespeare as a delineator of character. He is a little lacking in depth and subtlety; he has an eye mainly for strongly marked characteristics, and certain of his personages are but superficially delineated. He makes no special intellectual or moral demands on us, as does, for example, Meredith or Thackeray; he had little sense of the finer shades, as had Jane Austen; and he cannot quite compare with Carlyle in the portrayal of historic personages. Further, it is a notable circumstance that few or none of his personages develop under his hands; for the most part, they are, throughout the narrative, exhibited with characteristics which are unmodified by time, experience or events. To analyse character was, in fact, as little his aim, as it was to promulgate any special social dogma. As Carlyle laments, he was not 'possessed with an idea'; but, however predominant and effective a part ideas may play in modern drama and fiction, they have their disadvantages; they are apt to prove rather a hindrance than an aid to more than temporary success in the more creative forms of literature. That Scott was not actuated by any more special purpose than that of giving delight to his readers may even be reckoned one of the chief sources of his charm and of the widely beneficent influence he exercises. He attracts us mainly by an exhibition of the multifarious pageantry of life; or, as Carlyle puts it, his was 'a genius in extenso, as we may say, not in intenso.' Yet, as a delineator of character, he has his strong points. He had thoroughly studied the lowland Scot. If, not knowing Gaelic, he never properly understood the Highlander, and portrays mainly his superficial peculiarities arising from an imperfect command of lowland Scots and a comparative ignorance of the arts of civilised life-portrays him as the foreigner is usually portrayed in English novels-he knew his lowland Scot as few have ever known him. Here are 'no deceptively painted automatons,' but 'living men and women.' He is more especially successful with the Scot of the humble or burgher class, and withI] Humourist and Romance Writer

25

Scottish eccentrics gentle or simple. Jeanie Deans and her Cameronian father David, the theologically dull but practically wide-awake ploughman Cuddie Headrig and his fanatic mother the covenanting Mause, Meg Merrilies, even if she be a little stagey, the border farmer, Dandie Dinmont, Dominie Sampson, Ritt Master Dalgetty, Baillie Nicol Jarvie, the bedesman Edie Ochiltree, that pitiable victim of litigation, the irrepressible Peter Peebles, the Antiquary himself-these and such as these are all immortals. His success with such characters was primarily owing to his genial intercourse with all classes and his peculiar sense of humour. In depicting eccentrics or persons with striking idiosyncrasies, or those in the lower ranks of life, he displays at once an amazing fecundity and a well-nigh matchless efficacy. Here, he has a supremacy hardly threatened amongst English writers even by Dickens, for, unlike Dickens, he is never fantastic or extravagant. If not so mirth-provoking as Dickens, he is, in his humourous passages, quite as entertaining, and his eccentrics never, as those of Dickens often do, tax our belief in their possible existence. As a humourist, his one drawback-a drawback which, with many, prevents an adequate appreciation of his merits-is that his most characteristic creations generally express themselves in a dialect the idiomatic niceties of which can be fully appreciated only by Scotsmen, and not now by every one of that nationality. But the singularity of Scott is the peculiar combination in him of the humourist with the romance writer, of the man of the world with the devoted lover of nature and ardent worshipper of the past. While, with a certain superficiality in the portrayal of particular characters, he, pace Carlyle, displays an extraordinary felicity in the portrayal of others, he unites with this peculiar gift an exceptional power of vivifying the past on a very extended scale-the past, at least, as conceived by him. The question has been raised as to the historic value or historic correctness of his presentations. It need hardly be said that he was much more minutely and comprehensively versed in Scottish history and Scottish antiquarianism than in those of other countries, and had a much better understanding of Scottish than of other national characteristics. At the same time, his training as a Scottish novelist was of immense service to him when he found it advisable to seek fresh woods and pastures new. Without his previous Scottish experiences he could, for example, hardly have been so successful as he was in the case either of26

Sir [Falter Scott

[cH.

Quentin Durward or of Ivanhoe, which may be deemed his purely romantic masterpieces. He had no original mastery of the period of Louis XI. He had not even visited the scenes of his story; for these, he relied mainly on certain drawings of landscapes and ancient buildings made by his friend Skene of Rubislaw, who had just returned from a tour in the district. Lockhart, also, observed him 'many times in the Advocates' Library, poring over maps and gazetteers with care and anxiety.' For his historical and biographical inspiration, he was dependent mainly on the Me'moires of Philippe de Comines, supplemented by details from the chronicles of the period. We have only to turn to these authorities in order to see with what deftness he created his living world from a few records of the past, and the striking character of his success was attested by the admiring enthusiasm with which the work was received in France. As regards Ivanhoe, it has been shown that he is glaringly at fault in regard to some of the main features of the Norman period, and more particularly as to the relations between Saxons and Normans, on which the main tenor of the narrative depends. Nevertheless, he had so minute a mastery of the manners, customs, cardinal characteristics and circumstances of the chivalric past, and was so profoundly in sympathy with its spirit, that he is able to confer an atmosphere of reality on the period he seeks to illustrate, for which we may look in vain in the records of careful scientific historians. In the case of the purely Scottish novels, he was more at home and more completely master of his materials; but, for that reason, he was, perhaps, less careful about historic accuracy in details; as he puts it, 'a romancer wants but a hair to make a tether of.' No such persons, for example, as Rashleigh, or Francis Osbaldistone, or Miss Vernon, or her father, were associated in the manner these persons are represented to have been with any Jacobite rising; and, in addition, the whole financial story on which the plot turns is hopelessly muddled. Further, Rob Roy, a historical personage, never played any part in connection with Jacobitism at all similar to that assigned him in the novel. Then, in Waverley, the Fergus Maclvor whose ambitions occupy much of our attention is a mere interpolation, and by no means a happy portrait of a Highland chief; and, in Redgauntlet, the second appearance of prince Charlie in the north of England is without foundation either in fact or in tradition. Again, in The Abbot, historic truth is even more wantonly violated-violated after aI]

Historical Inaccuracies

27

fashion that tends to bewilder the reader. While the Setons were very devoted followers of queen Mary, the Henry Seton and Catherine Seton of the novel are merely imaginary creations. Although Mary Seton, one of 'the four Marys,' was sent for by the queen to attend on her in England, and Lord Seton met her shortly after her escape from Lochleven, no lady of the name of Seton was in attendance on her in Lochleven castle. What is worse, the Lady Mary Fleming, whom Scott represents as in attendance on her there is apt to be confounded either with Lady Fleming, who was the queen's governess in France, or with Mary Fleming, one of the four Marys, who, by this time, was the wife of Maitland of Lethington. Further, while Scott may partly be excused for his version of the nature of the pressure on the queen to cause her to demit her crown, he is specially unfortunate in representing Sir Robert Melville as deputed by the council to accompany Lord Lindsay on his mission, though his presence undoubtedly adds to the effectiveness of the scene with the queen. Again, in Old Mortality, Scott found it advisable, for artistic purposes, to place Henry Morton in a more immediately dangerous position than could possibly have been his; and, on the other hand, the indulged minister Poundtext, whom he represents as seeking to exercise a moderating influence in the council of the rebels, could not have been there, since none of the indulged ministers took part in the rebellion. Many minor errors of detail in his Scottish novels have also been pointed out by critics; but the important matter is his mastery of the multifarious characteristics of the period with which he deals and his power to bring home to the reader its outstanding peculiarities. In the non-Scottish novels, and in Scottish novels of earlier periods of history, the spirit of romance is the prevailing element. Here, the portraiture of characters, except in the case of main figures, is generally superficial. Such humorous or eccentric personages as are introduced cannot compare with those who, in the novels of the more modern periods, indulge in the vernacular; they are a kind of hybrid creation, suggested, partly, from the author's own observation and, partly, by books. In the Scottish novels of the more modern periods, while the romance is of a more homely kind, and has, also, for us, lost its freshness in a manner that the earlier or the foreign element has not, there is included, on the other hand, that immortal gallery of Scottish characters to which allusion has already been made,28

Sir Waiter Scott

[CH.

and the creation of which-however highly his purely romantic genius may be estimated-is the most unequivocal testimony to his greatness. Great as was the actual achievement of Scott, it has reasonably been doubted whether he made the most of his extraordinary endowments. It was hardly contributory to this that, though by no means a poor man, he set himself with desperate eagerness to enrich himself by literature. While he had a deep enthusiasm for the literary vocation; while the hours he spent in writing were mostly hours of keen delight to him and he never apparently deemed it a toil; yet, his social aspirations seem to have been stronger than his literary ambition. As Lockhart states: 'His first and last worldly ambition was himself to be the founder of a distinct branch,' of the clan Scott; he 'desired to plant a lasting root, and dreamt not of lasting fame, but of long distant generations rejoicing in the name of " Scott of Abbotsford." By this idea all his reveries, all his aspirations, all his plans and efforts were overshadowed and controlled.' This ambition was the product of the same romantic sentiment which was the original inspiration of his literary efforts. It was not a mere vulgar striving for opulence and rank; it was associated with peculiar border partialities and enthusiasms; to be other than a border laird and chief and the founder of a new border house had no charms for him. Still, excusable as his ambition may have been, it was to have for him very woeful consequences. Though, without this special incentive, he might not have exerted himself so strenuously in literature as he did, he would have escaped the pecuniary disasters in a herculean effort to remedy which he overtaxed his brain and abruptly shortened his life; and, if the absence of ulterior motives might have lessened his literary production, its fruits might, in quality, have been considerably bettered. True, rapidity of production was one of his special gifts. It was rendered possible by his previous mastery of his materials and the possession of a nervous system which it was almost impossible to tire; and, in his case, the emotional excitement of creation almost demanded celerity of composition; but it was not incumbent on him to omit careful revision of his first drafts. Had he not disdained this, many somewhat wearisome passages might have been condensed, various errors or defects of style might have been corrected, redundances might have been removed, inconsistencies weeded out and the plots more effectively adjusted. How immensely he might have bettered the literary quality of his novels by careful revision there is sufficient proof in thatI]

Defects and Merits of his Style

29

splendid masterpiece Wandering Willie's Tale, the manuscript of which shows many important amendments. While the carelessness of Scott is manifest in defects of construction and in curious contradictions in small details, it is more particularly apparent in the style of portions of merely narrative or descriptive passages. Yet, with all its frequent clumsiness, its occasional lapses into mere rodomontade, its often loosely interwoven paragraphs, and its occasionally halting grammar, his style is that of a great writer. Except when he overburdens it with lore, legal or antiquarian, it sparkles with interest, its phrases and epithets are often exceptionally happy, and, in his more emotional or more strikingly imaginative passages, he attains to an exceptional felicity of diction. This is the case throughout Wandering Willie's Tale; and the description of the ghastly revellers in Redgauntlet castle beginning: 'There was the fierce Middleton,' is unsurpassable in apt and graphic phraseology. The farewell of Meg Merrilies to Ellangowan has, also, been singled out by critics for special praise; but many of his purely descriptive passages are, likewise, wholly admirable. Take, for example, the account of the gathering storm in The Antiquary: The disk of the sun became almost totally obscured ere he had altogether sunk below the horizon, and an early and lurid shade of darkness blotted the serene twilight of a summer evening, etc. or the picture in The Abbot of the various personages and groups that traversed the vestibule of Holyrood palace: 'Here the hoary statesman,' etc.; or the description of the Glasgow midnight in Rob Roy: Evening had now closed and the growing darkness gave to the broad, still and deep expanse of the brimful river, first a hue sombre and uniform-then a dismal and turbid appearance, partially lighted by a waning and pallid moon, etc. or the woodland scene in The Legend of Montrose, where Dalgetty is pursued by the bloodhounds of the marquis of Argyll: The moon gleamed on the broken pathway and on the projecting cliffs of rock round which it winded, its light intercepted here and there by the branches of bushes and dwarf trees, which finding nourishment in the crevices of the rocks, in places overshadowed the brow and ledge of the precipice. Below a thick copsewood lay in deep and dark shadow, etc. Passages such as these are common with Scott; and, as for his dialogues, though, in the English, he occasionally lapses into curious30 Sir [Jalter Scott [CH. I stiltednesses, the Scottish or semi-Scottish are invariably beyond praise, both for their apt expressiveness, and their revelation of character. Necessarily, Scott's influence was felt more drastically in Scotland than elsewhere. The enormous interest aroused there by the publication of his poetic romances and then of his novels we can now hardly realise. It quite outvied that immediately caused by the poetry of Burns, who, to use Burns's own expression, was less 'respected' during his life than he gradually came to be after his death. While some aspects of Scott's presentations of the past called forth, at first, some protests from the stricter sectarians, the general attitude towards them was that of enthusiastic appreciation; and it is hardly possible to exaggerate their effect in liberating Scotland from the trammels of social and religious tradition. He did not, however, found a poetic school in Scotland. In England, he had various poetic imitators that are now forgotten; and he had, further, a good deal to do with the predominance of narrative in subsequent English verse. Byron, also, was directly indebted to him in the case of his narrative verse, and echoes of his method and manner are even to be found in Macaula ays Lays of Ancient Rome. In fiction, he may almost be reckoned the founder of the historical romance, in which he has had many successors, both in this country and abroad; and, if Smollett was his predecessor in the Scottish novel, and is more responsible than he for the earlier novels of Galt, Scott may be deemed the originator of a pretty voluminous Scottish romantic school, of which the most distinguished representative is R. L. Stevenson; while, with Smollett and Galt, he has been the forerunner of a vernacular school of fiction which, within late years, developed into a variety to which the term 'kailyard' has, with more or less appositeness, been applied. On the continent, Scott shared with Byron a vogue denied to all other English writers except Shakespeare, and his influence was closely interwoven with the romantic movement there, and, more especially, with its progress in France.CHAPTER II

BYRON GEORGE GORDON, sixth Lord Byron, and descendant of an ancient Norman family that accompanied William the Conqueror to England, was the only son of 'Mad Jack' Byron by his second marriage with the Scottish heiress, Catherine Gordon of Gight. He was born in London, on 22 January 1788; but, shortly after his birth, owing to his father's withdrawal to France in order to escape from his creditors, the future poet was brought by his mother to Aberdeen. Here, his first boyhood was spent, and the impressions which he received of Deeside, Lochnagar and the Grampians remained with him throughout his life and have left their mark upon his poetry. By the death of his great-uncle, William, fifth Lord Byron, in 1798, the boy succeeded to the title and to the Byron estates of Newstead priory and Rochdale; in the year 1801, he entered Harrow school. Up to this time, his life had been that of 'a wild mountain colt'; his education, both intellectual and moral, had been neglected, and his mother petted and abused him in turn; his father had died when he was a child of three. Sensitive and proud by nature, his sensitiveness was aggravated by his lameness and his poverty, while his pride was nurtured by his succession, at the age of ten, to a peerage. At Harrow, he made many friends, read widely and promiscuously in history and biography, but never became an exact scholar. To these schoolboy years also belongs the story of his romantic, unrequited love for Mary Ann Chaworth. From Harrow, Byron proceeded, in October 1805, to Trinity college, Cambridge; but the university, though it widened his circle of friends, never won his affections in the way that Harrow had. While at Harrow, he had written a number of short poems, and, in January 1807, he printed for private circulation a slender volume of verse, Fugitive Pieces, the favourable reception of which led to the publication, in the following March, of Hours of Idleness. The contemptuous,32

Byron

[CH.

but not wholly unjust, criticism of this volume in The Edinburgh Review, which is generally supposed to have been the work of Lord Brougham, while it stung the sensitive poet to the quick, also spurred him to retaliation, and, early in 1809, appeared the famous satire, English Bards and Scotch Reviewers, which swiftly ran through several editions and made its author famous. Shortly before it appeared, Byron came of age and took his seat in the House of Lords. In the following June, accompanied by his friend, John Cam Hobhouse, Byron left England for a tour in the Mediterranean and the east. He was away for little more than a year; but the impressions which he received of the life and scenery of Spain, Portugal and the Balkan peninsula profoundly affected his mind and left an indelible imprint upon his subsequent work as a poet. The letters which he wrote at this time furnish a singularly vivid record of the gay life of Spanish cities, the oriental feudalism of Ali pasha's Albanian court, and of the memories of, and aspirations for, political freedom which were quickened within him during his sojourn at Athens. The first two books of Childe Harold and the oriental tales-The Giaour, The Bride of Abydos, The Corsair and The Siege of Corinth-were the immediate outcome of this year of travel, but the memory of the scenes which he had witnessed remained freshly in his mind when, years afterwards, he composed Don Juan, and, at the close of his life, played his heroic part in the liberation of Greece. The publication of the first two cantos of Childe Harold in 1812, shortly after his return to England, placed Byron on the summit of the pinnacle of fame, and, from this time onwards to his death, he remained, through good report and evil report, the poet most prominently before the minds of Englishmen. The story of the three years which he spent as the lion of London society under the regency, and of his marriage with Miss Milbanke in 1815, is too familiar to need detailed record here; nor is this the place to dwell upon the causes which led to the separation of husband and wife shortly after the birth of their only child, Ada, in 1816. Rightly or wrongly, the sympathies of English society at this crisis in Byron's life were overwhelmingly on the side of Lady Byron, and the poet was subjected to the grossest insults. At first bewildered, and then lacerated in his deepest feelings, by the hue and cry against him, he perceived that 'if what was whispered and muttered and murmured was true, I was unfit for England; if false, England was unfit for me.' He accordingly left EnglandII] Final Departure from England

33

for the continent in May 1816, and never returned. He proceeded leisurely up the Rhine to Switzerland, where he made the acquaintance of Shelley and his wife, and spent much time in their society. Thence, he passed to Italy, and established himself before the end of the year at Venice, 'like the stag at bay, who betakes himself to the waters.' The events of the year 1816 mark a crisis both in Byron's domestic life and in his poetic career. The outrage which he believed, not unreasonably, that he had suffered at the hands of English society embittered a mind naturally prone to melancholy, and equally prone to hide that melancholy beneath a mask of cynicism. Knowing only too well the hollowness of the world of English fashion under the regency, he looked upon the fit of virtuous indignation which made him its victim and drove him from the land as an outburst of envenomed hypocrisy. And, just as the contemptuous criticism of Hours of Idleness by the Edinburgh reviewer had roused him to a satiric onslaught upon the whole contemporary world of letters, so, now, in his new home, he prepared himself for the task of levelling against social hypocrisy the keenest weapons which a piercing wit and versatile genius had placed at his command. But, bitter as Byron's feelings towards England were, it is obvious that the new life which now opened up to him on the shores of the Adriatic proved congenial to his tastes and fostered the growth of his poetic genius. If the loose code of morals accepted by Venetian society plunged him, for a time, into libertinism, the beauty of the 'sea Cybele' and the splendour of her historic past fired his imagination. More or less indifferent to the triumphs of Italian plastic and pictorial art, he was in full accord with what was best in Italian poetry. His Lament of Tasso, Prophecy of Dante and Francesca of Rimini are an imperishable witness to the sympathy which he felt with the works and tragic destinies of two of Italy's greatest poets; his Venetian tragedies and Sardanapalus show the influence upon him of Alfieri, while his indebtedness to the great Italian mock-heroic school, from Berni to Casti, is everywhere manifest in Beppo and in his great masterpiece, Don Juan. Finally, his liaison with the countess Guiccioli, which began in 1819 and remained unbroken till his death, brought him into direct touch with the Carbonari movement and made him the champion of the cause of national freedom. An exile from England, and deeply resentful of the wrongs which he had suffered there, Byron, nevertheless, continued to

E. L. XII. CH. II.

334

Byron

[CH.

follow with keen interest the course of English political, literary and domestic affairs. He kept up an active correspondence with the friends whom he had made there-Moore, Scott and his publisher, John Murray, among others-studiously read the English reviews, and remained almost morbidly sensitive to the reception of his works by the British public. He was, moreover, ever ready to offer hospitality to English friends in his Venetian home: Hobhouse was with him in the summer of 1818, and was followed, soon afterwards, by Shelley, whose intercourse with Byron is ideally commemorated in Julian and Maddalo; in the next year, he entertained Moore, who has left a vivid picture of his friend's domestic life at this time. At no period of his career, moreover, was Byron's literary activity so great as during the years which immediately followed his departure from England. His tour through Germany and Switzerland inspired the third canto of Childe Harold, The Prisoner of Chillon and his witch-drama, Manfred, while the concluding canto of Childe Harold was the outcome of an Italian tour entered upon in the spring of 1817, before he established himself definitely at Venice. To the year 1818 belong, among other things, Mazeppa, Beppo and the first canto of Don Juan; about the same time, he began his famous Memoirs, which he put into the hands of Moore, when his future biographer and editor visited him at Venice, and which, in accordance with the wishes of the poet's friend Hobhouse and his halfsister, Augusta Leigh, was committed to the flames after Byron's death. The publication of his poems-especially the third and fourth cantos of Childe Harold and Manfred-greatly increased Byron's reputation as a poet, and his fame spread from England to the continent. The resemblance of Manfred to Faust stimulated the interest of the most famous of Byron's literary contemporaries, Goethe, who, henceforth, showed a lively regard for the younger poet's genius and character. A correspondence sprang up between them; Byron dedicated to Goethe, in language of sincere homage, his tragedy Sardanapalus (1821), and, after Byron's death, Goethe honoured his memory by introducing him as Euphorion, child of Helen and Faust, of Hellenism and the renascence, in the second part of Faust. In the spring of 1819 began Byron's connection with Theresa, countess Guiccioli, the young wife of the sexagenarian count Guiccioli, whose home was at Ravenna. On either side the attachment was one of passionate devotion: the lady was prepared to make supreme sacrifices for the man she loved, and her influenceII]

Life at Venice ana Ravenna

35

upon him was ennobling. She lifted him out of the mire of Venetian libertinism and aroused his interest in the cause of Italian freedom; she inspired one of his sublimest poems, The Prophecy of Dante, while such was her power over him that, for her sake, he desisted, for a time, from the continuation of Don Juan after the completion of the fifth canto. In December 1819, Byron broke up his home at Venice and moved to Ravenna, in order to be nearer to the countess. Here, he was visited by Shelley, who, in a letter to Mrs Shelley, dated 8 August 1821, speaks as follows of the change which had come over his friend: Lord Byron is greatly improved in every respect. In genius, in temper, in moral views,in health, in happiness. The connection with La Guiccioli has been an inestimable benefit to him.... He has had mischievous passions, but these he seems to have subdued, and he is becoming, what he should be, a virtuous man. The interest which he took in the politics of Italy, and the actions he performed in consequence of it, are subjects not fit to be written, but are such as will delight and surprise you1. In the preceding year, the countess had obtained a papal decree of separation from her husband, and was now living in a villa belonging to her brother, count Gamba, about fifteen miles from Ravenna. Byron's literary activity remained unabated in his new home. To the Ravenna period belong, in addition to his Prophecy of Dante, Francesca of Rimini and his translation of the first canto of Pulci's Morgante Maggiore, most of his dramatic writings. Drama had always interested him keenly, and, while living in London, after his return from the east, he had been elected a member of the Drury lane theatre committee, and had thus gained some firsthand knowledge of the stage. His earliest play, Manfred, had been begun in Switzerland and completed at Venice in the spring of 1817; after his removal to Ravenna, he turned his attention to historical tragedy, and, in little more than a year, produced his two tragedies of Venetian history, Marino Faliero and The Two Foscari, together with his oriental Sardanapalus. Following upon these came the two 'mysteries,' Cain and Heaven and Earth, both written currente calamo between the July and October of 1821. These plays were not intended for the stage, and the only one acted during the author's lifetime was Marino Faliero, which was performed at Drury lane, against Byron's express wish, in April 1821. To the Ravenna period also belongs Byron's Letter to John Murray, Esq. on the Rev. W. L. Bowles's Strictures on the Life and Writings of Pope, in which the poet came forward as the Shelley's Prose Works, ed. Shepherd, R. H., vol. ii, p. 337. 3 236

Byron

[CH.

champion of Pope and the Augustan school of poetry against the attacks directed upon them by the romanticists. The controversy is chiefly interesting as an indication of Byron's regard for the classical principles of literary taste and, arising out of this, his uncritical exaltation of the poetry of Crabbe and Rogers over the great romantic poets of his own day. Of far greater consequence was his attack upon Southey, which followed a little later. The feud between the two poets was an old one: Southey had attacked Byron in an article contributed to Blackwood's Magazine (August 1819) and the younger poet had replied with Some Observations on the attack, in which he brought a charge of apostasy and slander against the poet laureate. In 1821 appeared Southey's fatuous A Vision of Judgment, prefixed to which was a gross onslaught upon Don Juan as 'a monstrous combination of horror and mockery, lewdness and impiety,' and a reference to its author as the founder of'the Satanic school' inspired by the spirit of Belial in their lascivious parts, and the spirit of Mioloch in those loathsome images of atrocities and horrors which they delight to represent. To all this, Byron's effective rejoinder was his own The Vision of Judgment, published in Leigh Hunt's magazine, The Liberal, in 1822. Byron's victory was complete and uncontestable, though the British government brought against the publisher a charge of 'calumniating the late King and wounding the feelings of his present Majesty,' and won their suit. Byron's connection with countess Guiccioli brought him, as already stated, into direct relationship with the Carboneria, one of the many secret societies of the time in Italy, which had its head-quarters in Naples, and of which count Pietro Gamba was an enthusiastic leader. Its ultimate aim was the liberation of Italy from foreign domination and the establishment of constitutional government. To Byron, this was 'a grand object-the very poetry of politics,' and to it he devoted, at this time, both his wealth and his influence. But the movement, owing to lack of discipline and resolution on the part of its adherents, proved abortive, and the Papal States confiscated the property of the Gambas and exiled them from the Romagna. They fled to Pisa in the autumn of 1821, where Byron soon joined them, and shared with them the palazzo Lanfranchi. The change of residence brought Byron into closer contact with Shelley, whose home, at this time, was in Pisa, and, through Shelley, he made the acquaintance of captain Medwin, the author of the Journal of theII] Byron and Leigh Hunt 37 Conversations ofLord Byron (1824). Here, too, he first met captain Trelawney, who subsequently accompanied the poet to Greece and, many years after Byron's death, published his Recollections of the last days of Shelley and Byron (1858). In April 1822, a heavy blow fell upon the poet through the death of his natural daughter Allegra, whose mother was Jane Clairmont, a half-sister of Mary Shelley; and, in the following month, in consequence of a streetbrawl with an Italian dragoon who had knocked Shelley from his horse, the little circle of friends at Pisa was broken up. Byron and the Gambas retired to a villa near Leghorn, while the Shelleys, with Trelawney, left for Lerici. The tragic death of Shelley in the gulf of Spezia took place two months later. Shortly before Shelley's death, he and Byron had prevailed upon Leigh Hunt to leave England and come out with his family to Italy, in order to take part with the two poets in the foundation of a magazine, The Liberal. The death of Shelley was a severe blow to this undertaking; but the first number, containing Byron's The Vision of Judgment, appeared in September 1822; the second number included among its pages the mystery-play, Heaven and Earth, while in the third number appeared, as an anonymous work, the literary eclogue entitled The Blues, which directed a somewhat ineffective satire upon the literary coteries of London society. After the appearance of the fourth number, containing Byron's translation of Morgante Maggiore, in July 1823, The Liberal came to an untimely end, and the relations between Byron and Leigh Hunt, which had from the first been strained, ended in complete rupture. In the meantime, Byron had once more changed his place of abode, and was now residing in the villa Saluzzo, Genoa. It was here that he made the acquaintance of the earl and countess of Blessington, and to the countess's vivacious, if untrustworthy, Conversations, we owe much of our knowledge of the poet's manner of life at this time. During these last years in Italy, his poetic composition had proceeded apace. Don Juan, after being laid aside for some time, was now, with the full consent of countess Guiccioli, continued. The sixth canto was begun in June 1822, and this, with the next two cantos, was published in the following month; by the end of March 1823, the sixteenth canto was finished. To the Pisa-Genoa period, also, belong his domestic tragedy, Werner, founded upon The German's Tale, included in Sophia and Harriet Lee's Canterbury Tales, his unfinished drama, The Deformed Transformed, the satiric poem, The Age of Bronze,38

Byron

[CH.

dealing with the last phase in Napoleon's career and the congress of Verona, and, finally, his romantic verse-tale, The Island. The failure of the Carbonari movement, in 1821, put an end, for the time being, to Byron's active cooperation in the cause of national freedom. But, even before the final defeat of the Carboneria, a new liberation movement in a new field had begun, on behalf of which Byron was destined to lay down his life. The Greek war of liberation from the thraldom of the Turk was set on foot in the spring of 1821, and soon won the support of enthusiasts in England, who formed a committee to help forward the movement and supply the Greeks with the necessary funds. Byron's sympathy with the cause of Greek freedom dates from his sojourn in Greece in the years 1810-11, and finds eloquent expression in the second canto of Childe Harold. In the spring of 1823, his active support in the Greek cause was solicited by the London committee, acting through captain Blaquiere and John Bowring, and, after a little hesitation, Byron decided to devote himself whole-heartedly to the movement; with that end in view, he prepared to man an armed brig and set sail for Greece. At the moment of departure, he received a highly courteous greeting in verse from Goethe, and, in acknowledging it, declared his intention of paying a visit to Weimar, should he return in safety from Greece. On 24 July, accompanied by count Pietro Gamba and captain Trelawney, he started from Leghorn in the brig 'Hercules,' and, ten days later, reached the island of Cephalonia in the Ionian sea. Here, he remained until the close of the year, anxiously watching developments and endeavouring, with great tact and patience, to put an end to Greek factions. His presence in Greek waters inspired enthusiasm among the people struggling for freedom; they looked to him as their leader, and some even hinted that, if success should attend their arms, he might become the king of an emancipated Greece. Correspondence took place between Byron and prince Alexander Mavrocordatos, one of the chief leaders in the war of liberation; and, on the arrival of the prince at Mesolonghi, with a fleet of ships, Byron joined him there, after an adventurous voyage, in January 1824. In the conduct of affairs at this time, Byron showed himself to be a great statesman and a born leader of men. The work of advocating unity among the various Greek tribes was no easy task for him, and he laboured tirelessly in the malarial climate of the gulf of Patras in the furtherance of this aim. His military project was to lead an expedition against the Turkish stronghold Lepanto,II]

Death at Mesolonghi

39

and, with this in view, he enlisted the services of five hundred Suliotes. But mutiny broke out among the soldiers, and, at a critical moment, an epileptic fit threatened Byron's life. For a time, he recovered; but, early in April, he caught a severe chill when sailing, wet to the skin, in an open boat; rheumatic fever set in, and, on the nineteenth day of the month, he died. His death was a severe blow to Greece, and plunged the nation into profound grief; when the news reached England, Tennyson, then a boy of fourteen, carved the words 'Byron is dead' upon a rock at Somersby, and felt that 'the whole world seemed darkened to me.' But the impartial verdict of posterity, looking back upon his career and endeavouring to see it in its true perspective, has been that nothing in his life became him like the leaving of it. The ardent wish of Greece was that his body should be buried in the temple of Theseus at Athens, and thus remain in the land for which he had laid down his life; but other counsels prevailed, and Byron found his last resting place in the village church of Hucknall Torkard, outside the gates of Newstead priory. In passing from the generation of Wordsworth and Coleridge to that of Byron and Shelley, we recognise that a certain change had come over the spirit of English poetry, and that this change, in no small measure, was determined by the change which had come over the mind of England and of Europe. Wordsworth and Coleridge had found inspiration in the large faiths and regenerating principles which called into being the French revolution; Byron and Shelley, on the other hand, produced their most characteristic works in the days of the reactionary Holy Alliance. And in the space between the era of faith and the era of reaction loomed the colossal form of Napoleon astride a blood-stained Europe. Shelley, though he underwent times of deep depression and suffered much at the hands of a hostile government, was of too ethereal a temper to be cowed by the spirit of the time, or to abandon his faith in man's perfectibility imparted to him by Godwin; but, Byron, with his feet of clay, and with a mind which, for good and evil, was profoundly responsive to the prevailing currents of contemporary thought, remained, from first to last, the child of his age. And that age was one of profound disillusionment. The implicit trust in the watchwords of the revolution had long faded from men's minds, while the principles by which men hoped to consecrate the settlement of the congress of Vienna were proving still more illusory. The Holy Alliance was to bring back the golden age, and the emperor40

Byron

[CH.

of Russia had proudly declared that, henceforth, princes were to regard each other as brothers, and their peoples as their children, and that all their acts were to be founded upon the gospel of Christ. Yet, within a very few years, the Holy Alliance had become a byword among men, standing as it did for all that was tyrannical and reactionary; the attitude of the progressive party in England towards the principles which really actuated it is clearly indicated by Moore's Fables for the Holy Alliance, Shelley's Lines written during the Castlereagh Administration and many a scathing passage of Don Juan. The younger generation of poets, romantics though they were, also differed from their elders in some of the main principles of literary criticism. The early masters of the romantic school, in their war against the neo-classic canons of the Augustan, confounded classicism with the Greek and Roman classics; and, in their joyous discovery of medieval romance and ballad, paid no regard to the poetry and mythology of Greece. Reaction inevitably followed, and to the younger generation of poets fell the duty of touching with the magic wand of romance the timehonoured myths and fables of early Greece. Thus, from out of the cold ashes of classicism there arose the Hellenism of the early nineteenth century, with Shelley and Keats as its inspired prophets. To Byron, the political movements of modern Greece were of more account than its ancient poetry and mythology, yet, in him too, there is a strong reaction against the romanticism of the preface to Lyrical Ballads. When the romantic principles of the new school seemed everywhere triumphant, he came forward as the dauntless champion of Pope, and, when he essayed drama, he turned his back upon Shakespeare and sat at the feet of Alfieri. Byron was ever of the opposition, and, to many, his championship of classicism has seemed little better than the pose of perversity; but a close study of his works serves to show that, while much of his poetry is essentially romantic in spirit, and even enlarges the horizon of romanticism, he never wholly broke away from the Augustan poetic diction. The union of classicism and romanticism is everywhere apparent in Hours of Idleness. The romantic note is clearly sounded in such verses as I would I were a careless child, When I roved a young Highlander and the justly famous Lachin y Gair; the influence of Macpherson's Ossian is very strong in The Death of Calmar and Orla, and blends with that of the ballad-poets in Oscar of Alva. No less apparent is the influenceII]

Hours of Idleness

4I

of Moore: one may trace it in the elegiac strain of the love-lyrics and in the rhetorical trick of repetition at the close of the stanza; it is obvious, too, that Byron has successfully imitated the anapaestic lilt of Irish Melodies in many of his lyric and elegiac poems. At the same time, he shows no desire to break away from the eighteenth century traditions. Childish Recollections is conceived and executed in the manner of Pope. The personification of abstractions, the conventional poetic diction and the fingering of the heroic couplet, alike recall the Augustan traditions, which are no less apparent in such poems as Epitaph on a Friend and To the Duke of Dorset. In the Elegy on Newstead Abbey, thought, sentiment and verse recall the famous Elegy of Gray, while, in the lines To Romance, he professes to turn away with disgust from the motley court of romance where Affectation and 'sickly Sensibility' sit enthroned, and to seek refuge in the realms of Truth. Thus already in this early volume of poems we meet with that spirit of disillusionment which informs much of Byron's later work, while, in the closing stanza of I would I were a careless child, we have a foretaste of the Byron of Manfred, eager to shun mankind and to take refuge in the gloom of the mountain glens. At the same time, this early volume bears witness to that which his letters abundantly show-Byron's great capacity for friendship. In spite of all his misanthropy, no poet has esteemed more highly than Byron the worth of friendship, or cherished a deeper affection for scenes around which tender associations had grown up; and, in this first volume of verses, the generous tributes to old school-friends, and the outpouring of his heart in loyal affection for Harrow, occupy no small space. In English Bards and Scotch Reviewers, we witness the full triumph of Byronic classicism. Inspired by Pope, and by Gifford's Maeviad and Baviad, this high-spirited satire is, indeed, the Dunciad of romanticism. Its undiscriminating attack upon almost every member of the romantic school is accompanied by an equally undiscriminating laudation of Dryden and Pope, together with those poets of Byron's own generation, Rogers and Campbell, whose Pleasures of Memory and Pleasures of Hope remained faithful, in an age of faithlessness, to the classical tradition. Byron is himself the severest critic of his own satire, and, in a letter written from Switzerland in July 1816, he censures its tone and temper, and acknowledges 'the injustice of much of the critical and some of the personal part of it.' In concision and finish of style, Byron falls far below the level of consummate42

Byron

[CH.

mastery of satiric portraiture reached by Pope in the Epistles to Arbuthnot and To Augustus, while he makes no attempt to imitate the brilliant mock-heroic framework of the Dunciad: but the disciple has caught much of his master's art of directing the shafts of his raillery against the vulnerable places in his adversaries' armour, and even the most enthusiastic admirer of Scott, Coleridge or Wordsworth can afford to laugh at the travesty of Marmion and Lyrical Ballads. In spite of occasional telling phrases, like that in which he characterises Crabbe as 'nature's sternest painter yet the best,' the satire is of little value as literary criticism; while the fact that he directs his attack upon the romantic poets and, at the same time, upon their arch-adversary, Jeffrey, is sufficient indication that it was individual prejudice rather than any fixed conviction which inspired the poem. It is difficult to overestimate the influence upon Byron's poetic career of his travels through southern Europe in the years 1809-10; though different in character, it was as far-reaching as that experienced by Goethe during his tour in Italy twenty-three years before. For the time being, his sojourn in the Spanish and Balkan peninsulas put an end to his classical sympathies and made him a votary of romance. His pictures of Spain, it is true, are mainly those of a realist and a rhetorician, but, when he has once set foot upon Turkish soil, a change appears; here, his life was, in itself, a romantic adventure, and, among the Albanian fastnesses, he was brought face to face with a world which was at once oriental in its colouring, and medieval in its feudalism. The raw material of romance which Scott, in the shaping of his versetales, had had to gather laboriously from the pages of medieval chroniclers, was here deployed before Byron's very eyes, and the lightning speed with which he wrote his oriental tales on his return to England was due to the fact that he had only to recall the memories of what he had himself seen while a sojourner in the empire of the Turk. Hence, too, the superiority of Byron's eastern pictures to those of Southey and Moore: while they had been content to draw upon the record of books, he painted from life. The surprising success of the first two cantos of Childe Harold on their first appearance in 1812 was in no small measure due to the originality of the design, and to Byron's extension of the horizon of romance. Before this time, poets had made certain attempts to set forth in verse the experiences of their foreign travels. Thus, Goldsmith's Traveller is the firstfruits of the tourII] Childe Harold 43 which he had made, flute in hand, through Flanders, France and Italy, in 1756. But the eighteenth century spirit lay heavy on Goldsmith: broad generalisations take the place of the vivid, concrete pictures which, in a more propitious age, he might have introduced into his poem, and racy description is sacrificed to the Augustan love of moralising. Byron, for his part, is by no means averse to sententious rhetoric; but he has, also, the supreme gift of vivid portrayal, whether it be that of a Spanish bull-fight, the voice of a muezzin on the minaret of a Turkish mosque, or the sound of revelry on the night before Waterloo. The creation of an ideal pilgrim as the central figure before whom this kaleidoscopic survey should be displayed, though good in idea, proved but a partial success. There was much that appealed to the jaded tastes of English society under the regency in the conception of Childe Harold as 'Pleasure's palled victim,' seeking distraction from disappointed love and Comus revelry in travel abroad; but, placed amid scenes which quiver with an intensity of light and colour, Childe Harold remains from first to last an unreal, shadowy form. He is thrust into the picture as fitfully as the Spenserian archaisms are thrust into the text, and, when, in the last canto, he disappears altogether, we are scarcely conscious of his absence. In his prose, Byron denies again and again the identity of Childe Harold with himself; but, in his verse, he comes nearer to the truth by his confession that his hero is a projection of his own intenser self into human form: 'Tis to create, and in creating live A being more intense, that we endow With form our fancy, gaining as we give The life we image, even as I do now. (Childe Harold II, 6.) When Childe Harold was begun at Janina in Albania, in 1809, the hero may well have seemed to his creator as an imaginary figure; but, between the composition of the first two cantos and the third, there intervened for Byron a course of experiences which converted what was ideal and imaginary into bitter reality. The satiety, the lonely heart-sickness and the loathing for his native land, with which the poet imbues his hero in the opening stanzas of the first canto, had won an entrance into Byron's own heart when he bade farewell to England in 1816. It was, accordingly, no longer necessary for him to create an ideal being, for the creator and the creation had become one. The third and fourth cantos show, in comparison with the first44

Byron

[CH.

two, a far greater intensity of feeling and a deeper reading of life. Something of the glitter of rhetoric remains; but it is no longer cold, for a lava-flood of passion has passed over it. The poet is still a master of vivid description; but the objects that he paints are now seen quivering in an atmosphere of personal emotion. The human interest of the poem has also deepened; in the second canto, while recalling the historic associations of Greece, he sketched no portrait of Athenian poet, sage, or statesman: but, in his description of Switzerland, he seems unable to escape from the personality of Rousseau, and, in northern Italy, his progress is from one poet's shrine to another. Side by side with this deeper human interest, there is, also, a profounder insight into external nature. Not only does he describe with incisive power majestic scenes like that of the Alps towering above the lake of Geneva, or that of the foaming cataract of Terni: he also enters, though only as a sojourner, into that mystic communion with nature wherein mountains, sea and sky are felt to be a part of himself and he of them. Among the solitudes of the Alps, Byron becomes, for a while, and, perhaps through his daily intercourse with Shelley, a true disciple of the great highpriest of nature, Wordsworth, whom elsewhere he often treats with contemptuous ridicule. Yet, even when he approaches Wordsworth most nearly, we are conscious of the gulf which separates them from one another. Byron seeks communion with nature in order to escape from man; high mountains become 'a feeling' to him when the hum of human cities is a torture; but Wordsworth hears in nature the music of humanity, and the high purpose of his life is to sing the spousal verse of the mystic marriage between the discerning intellect of man and the goodly universe. In his letter to Moore, prefixed to The Corsair, Byron confesses that the Spenserian stanza is the measure most after his own heart, though it is well to remember that when he wrote these words he had not essayed the ottava rima. Disfigured as the stanzas of Childe Harold often are by jarring discords, it must be confessed that this ambitious measure assumed, in Byron's hands, remarkable vigour, while its elaborately knit structure saved him from the slipshod movement which is all too common in his blank verse. Yet, this vigour is purchased at a heavy price. Rarely in Byron do we meet with the stately, if slow-moving, magnificence with which Spenser has invested the verse of his own creation; the effect produced on our ears by the music of The Faerie Queene is that of a symphony of many strings, whereas, inII]

hie Verse- Tales

45

Childe Harold, we listen to a trumpet-call, clear and resonant,\ but wanting the subtle cadence and rich vowel-harmonies of the Elizabethan master. In the years which elapsed between Byron's return from foreign travel and his final departure from England in 1816, the form of poetry which chiefly occupied his mind was the romantic versetale. The Giaour, The Bride of Abydos, The Corsair, Lara, The Siege of Corinth and Parisina all fall within this period; they were written in hot haste, partly to satisfy the public taste for work of this character, and partly to wring the poet's thoughts from reality to imagination. After taking up his residence on the continent, other forms of poetry claimed his first attention; but the appearance of The Prisoner of Chillon in 1816, Mazeppa in 1819 and The Island in 1823 shows that Byron never wholly relinquished his delight in the verse-tale. Moreover, though it was the early stories of oriental life which most impressed his contemporaries, it is probable that the later tales will live longest. In essaying the verse-tale, Byron entered into direct rivalry with Scott, imitating his metric art and making the same bold appeal to the instincts of the age for stirring adventure and romantic colour. But, whereas Scott sought his themes chiefly in the pages of history, Byron was content to draw largely upon personal -experience; instead of the clash of passion between lowlander and highlander, or cavalier and roundhead, we witness the antagonism of Christian and Mussulman, of Greek and Turk. The spirit of medieval chivalry in which the wizard of the north delighted, is, in Byron, replaced by the fanaticism of the Moslem, and by that love of melodrama which we invariably associate with the Byronic hero. Byron lacks Scott's gift of lucid narrative, nor has he that sense of the large issues at stake which gives to the Scottish lays something of epic massiveness; but he has greater passion, and, within certain strictly defined limits, offers a more searching disclosure of the human heart. In these early oriental tales, we meet with the true Byronic hero, first faintly outlined in Childe Harold and culminating, a little later, in Manfred and Cain. He figures under many names, is sometimes Mussulman and sometimes Christian, but, amid all his disguises, retains the same essentials of personality and speaks the same language. He is a projection of a certain habit of mind on the part of Byron himself into surroundings which are partly imaginary, and partly based on personal experience. In The Corsair and Lara, Byron seems to have outgrown the influence of Scott and to have fallen46

Byron

[CH.

under that of Dryden. With the change from the octosyllabic to the decasyllabic couplet, the style grows more rhetorical: the speeches of Conrad-Lara and Gulnare-Kaled acquire something of that declamatory character which we meet with in the heroes and heroines of Dryden's Fables, and, though Byron preserves the romanticist's delight in high-pitched adventure and glowing colours, he also displays the neo-classic fondness for conventional epithets and the personification of abstractions. In Parisina, and, still more, in The Prisoner of Chillon, there is a welcome return to a simpler style: the gorgeous east no longer holds him in fee, and he breaks away both from rhetorical speech and melodramatic situations. In Parisina, he invests a repellent, but deeply tragic, theme with dignity and restrained beauty; no artifice of rhetoric mars the sincerity of the passion, and nowhere else does Byron come so near towards capturing the subtle cadence of the Christabel verse. In The Prisoner of Chillon, he advances still farther in the direction of sincerity of emotion and simplicity of utterance. Love of political freedom, which was always the noblest passion in Byron's soul, inspired the poem, and, here, as in the third canto of Childe Harold, written about the same time, we are conscious of the influence of Wordsworth. The Sonnet on Chillon is as generous in emotion and as sonorous in its harmony as Wordsworth's sonnet On the extinction of the Venetian Republic; and, in his introduction into the poem itself of the bird with azure wings that seemed to be the soul of Bonnivard's dead brother, there is something of that delicate symbolism in which both Wordsworth and Coleridge found peculiar delight. A new note is struck in Mazeppa. The mood of The Prisoner of Chillon is one of elegiac tenderness, whereas, here, we are conscious of the glory of swift motion, as we follow the Cossack soldier in his life-in-death ride across the Russian steppes. Scott had essayed a similar theme in his picture of Deloraine's ride to Melrose abbey, and, in either case, we feel ourselves spell-bound by the animation of poets to whom a life of action was a thing more to be desired than the sedentary ease of a man of letters. The Island is the last of Byron's verse-tales and the last of his finished works. Written in 1823, just before he set sail for Greece, it shows that neither the classic spirit which he displays in many of his dramas, nor the cynical realism of much of Don Juan, could stifle in him the glow of high romance. In the love-story of Torquil and Neuha, we have a variation of the Juan-Haidee episode, set against a background of tropical magnificence, andII] Manfred 47 told with a zest which shows that advancing years availed nothing to diminish the youthful ardour of Byron. Apart from an early draft of the first act of Werner, Byron's dramatic works all belong to the years that succeed his final departure from England in 1816; and the same alternation between the romantic and the classic mode, which can be traced in his early poems, reappears still more clearly in his plays. Manfred, Cain and Heaven and Earth are romantic alike in spirit and structure; Marino Faliero, The Two Foscari and Sardanapalus represent a deliberate attempt on the part of the author to break loose from that domination of the Elizabethan masters which is so apparent in most of the poetic dramas of the romantic revival, and to fashion tragedy on the neo-classic principles of Racine and Alfieri. In other words, Byron is a romanticist when he introduces into his dramas supernatural beings and a strong lyrical element, but a classicist when he draws his material from the beaten track of history and refuses to admit the intervention of a spirit-world into the affairs of men. In Manfred, as in the third canto of Childe Harold, we recognise the spell which the Alps exercised on Byron's genius. In one of his letters he declares, 'It was the Staubach and the Jungfrau and something else, much more than Faustus, that made me write MSanfred1.' His sense of the spiritual life of nature finds lofty expression in the songs with which the spirits of the earth and air greet Manfred in the opening act, while the sublimity of the mountain scenery reacts upon the hero's soul in somewhat the same way as the storm on the heath reacts upon the soul of Lear. Yet, Manfred is, at the same time, the child of Goethe's Faust; Byron's indebtedness to Goethe is most marked in the opening soliloquy, but, soon, the younger poet's masterful individuality breaks the spell, and, in making Manfred reject the compact with the spirits of Arimanes and thereby remain master of his fate, Byron introduces a new and eminently characteristic element into the action. In Manfred, the Byronic hero of the oriental tales, an outcast from society, stained with crime and proudly solitary, reappears under a tenser and more spiritualised form. There is something Promethean in his nature, and he towers above the earlier Byronic heroes both by the greater intensity of his anguish of mind and, also, by the iron resolution of his will. Over the drama there hangs a pall of mystery, which the vision of Astarte, instead of lightening, serves only to make more I Letter to John Murray, 7 June 1820.48

Byron

[CH.

impenetrable. Speculation has been rife as to the precise nature of that 'something else' which, Byron tells us, went to the making of the play, but all attempts to elucidate the mystery remain frustrate. In Cain, we witness the final stage in the evolution of the Byronic hero. It is a play which bears somewhat the same relation to Paradise Lost that Manfred bears to Faust. The note of rebellion against social order and against authority is stronger than ever; but the conflict which goes to form the tragedy is, unlike that of Manfred, one of the intellect rather than of the passions. Cain is a drama of scepticism-a scepticism which is of small account in our day, but which, when the 'mystery' first appeared, seemed strangely like blasphemy, and called down upon Byron a torrent of anger and abuse. The scepticism finds expression, not only on the lips of Cain, but, also, on those of Lucifer, who is but Cain writ large, and whose spirit of rebellion against divine government gives to the drama its Titanic character. The story of Cain had fascinated Byron since the time when, as a boy of eight, his German master had read to him Gessner's Der Tod Abels, while the poet's indebtedness-first pointed out by Coleridge-to Milton's Satan, in his conception of Lucifer, needs no elaboration here. But what marks Cain off from Manfred and the verse-tales is that element of idyllic tenderness associated with the characters of Cain's wife, Adah, and their child, Enoch. This is beautiful in itself, and also serves as a fitting contrast to those sublimer scenes in which the hero is borne by Lucifer through the abysses of space and the dark abodes of Hades. Heaven and Earth, written at Ravenna within the space of fourteen days, seems to have been intended by its author as a corrective to what the world termed the impiety of Cain. It appeared almost simultaneously with Moore's Loves of the Angels, which deals, though in a vastly different mood, with the same biblical legend of the marriage of the sons of God to the daughters of men1. In the person of Aholibamah, the note of Byronic revolt rings out once more; but the 'mystery,' quite apart from its fragmentary character, lacks human interest and coherency, while its amorphous choral lyrics are a positive disfigurement. When we pass from Byron's romantic and supernatural dramas to his Venetian tragedies and Sardanapalus, we enter a very different world. Here, in the observance of the unities, the setting of the scenes and in all that goes to constitute the technique of 1 Genesis, chap. vi, verse 2.ii] Venetian rtragedies: Sardanapalus

49

drama, the principles of classicism are in force. Byron's reverence for the classic mould finds expression already in his English Bards and Scotch Reviewers, in which he makes the following appeal to Sheridan: Give, as thy last memorial to the age, One classic drama, and reform the stage. The acquaintance which he gained, during his residence in Italy, with the classical tragedies of Alfieri deepened the convictions of his youth, and the influence of the Italian tragedian can be traced in all Byron's historical dramas. This influence is, perhaps, strongest in Marino Faliero, and is all the more remarkable in that Byron is following in the path marked out by the romantic masters, Shakespeare and Otway, in his portrayal of Venetian life under its doges. But, here, as in The Two Foscari, the dramatic workmanship, though faithful to that regularity and precision of outline enjoined by classic tradition, suffers much from the recalcitrant nature of the material dramatised. The conduct of Marino Faliero, like that of the younger Foscari, though more or less true to history, is felt to be dramatically improbable; the motives which inspire the courses of action are inadequate, and indulgence in rhetorical declamation-the besetting sin of classical tragedy from Seneca onwards-adds still further to the sense of unreality in these plays. Sardanapalus is, from every point of view, a greater success than either of the Venetian tragedies. Though the plot is drawn from historical records-the Bibliothecae Historicae of Diodorus Siculus-Byron allows himself a free hand in shaping his materials, and the love-story, with all that concerns the heroine, Myrrha, is pure invention. The play was written at Ravenna in 1821 and owes much to the poet's daily intercourse with Theresa Guiccioli. Indeed, much might be said in favour of the view that the countess is herself portrayed in the person of Myrrha, who is painted with far greater sympathy and truth to life than any of the heroines of the verse-tales, while self-portraiture is seen in every line of the hero, Sardanapalus. The Assyrian king has far more of Byron in him than any of the so-called Byronic heroes; for, while they are but shadowy representations of a certain temper of mind, Sardanapalus is a creature of flesh and blood. Nor is the dramatic interest summed up in a single character: Myrrha, the Greek slave, Zarina, the wronged queen, and her brother, Salamenes, are all living characters, lacking, it may be, the subtle complexity of Shakespeare's dramatis personae, but boldly and firmly outlined

E. L. XII. CH. II.

450

Byron

[CH.

in the manner of classic tragedy, to which this play conforms more closely than any other of Byron's works. In Werner and The Deformed Transformed, there is a return to the romantic pattern of dramatic workmanship. The former is an unconvincing attempt to dramatise one of the Canterbury Tales of Sophia and Harriet Lee, and is deficient both in poetry and dramatic power: the latter, also based, to a certain extent, on a contemporary novel-Joshua Pickersgill's The Three Brothers (1803)-is an excursion into the realms of necromancy, and daringly presents the figure of a hunchback Julius Caesar engaging in the siege of Rome in 1527, and assuming the r6le of a Mephistopheles. It is an easy transition from Byron's historical dramas to such poems as The Lament of Tasso and The Prophecy of Dante, which take the form of dramatic soliloquies and may be looked upon as the creations of the historic imagination. The former was written in 1817, after a visit to the scenes of Tasso's life at Ferrara, while the latter belongs to the year 1819, which the poet spent in the city of Ravenna, where Dante lies buried. It is dedicated to countess Guiccioli, who suggested the theme. The mood of The Lament is one of unavailing sadness, ennobled by pride and transfigured by the Italian poet's love for Leonora d' Este; and the expression of this love and grief is marred by no rhetorical artifice on Byron's part, whose sympathy with Tasso renders him for once forgetful of self and capable of giving voice to a passion that was not his own but another's. The Prophecy is cast in a more ambitious mould, and is charged with intense personal emotion. The Dante who speaks is the apostle of that political liberty which had grown dear to Byron at a time when he was living in a country that lay under the Austrian yoke. Though written in English, it was, as Medwin tells us, intended for the Italians, to whom it was to be a glorious vision, revealed to them by their great national poet, of the risorgimento of Italy in their own day. Byron has, perhaps, failed to reproduce the noble clarity of Dante's mind, but he has caught the patriotic pride and saeva indignatio of the great Florentine, and, in making him the foreteller of an age when The Genius of my Country shall arise, A Cedar towering o'er the Wilderness, Lovely in all its branches to all eyes, Fragrant as fair, and recognised afar, Wafting its native incense through the skies-1 1 Canto iv, 74-78.ii] Byron's Lyrics: The Dream, Darkness 5 he has magnificently associated the aspirations of Dante with those of himself in the days of the Carboneria. Byron's terza rima does not lack power or sonority but it is not the terza rima of the Commedia; for, whereas Dante almost invariably makes a distinct pause at the close of the stanza, Byron frequently runs on the sense from one tercet to another and, thereby, goes far to destroy the metrical effect produced upon the ear by Dante. In no province of poetry is Byron's command of success so uncertain as in that of the lyric. He has left us a few songs which rank high even in an age which was transcendently great in lyric power and melody. But, only too often, the beauty with which one of his lyrics opens is not sustained, the passion grows turbid and the thought passes from pure vision to turgid commonplace. Among the most impassioned of his love-lyrics is that entitled When we two parted; it was written in 1808 and may have been inspired by the poet's hopeless passion for Mary Chaworth. To the same tragic episode in his career, though written later than the song, we owe The Dream (1816), in which passion and imagination combine to produce one of the most moving poems that Byron ever wrote. Intensely lyrical in spirit, the poem is, nevertheless, written in blank verse, which Byron here manipulates with a dexterity that he seems to have utterly lost in the loosely knit structure of his dramatic blank verse. The same volume which contained The Dream contained, also, another visionary poem in blank verse, Darkness. To those who assert that Byron, in his serious poetry, is little more than a poseur and a rhetorician, this poem should be a sufficient answer. It is the work of an unbridled imagination, a day-dream of clinging horrors; but, amid all its tumultuous visions of a world in which cosmos is reduced to chaos, we are made to feel the naked sincerity of the poet's soul. The most important group of Byron's poems, those in which his genius and personality find their fullest expression, still remains for consideration. His discovery of the Italian medleypoem, written in the ottava rima, was, for him, the discovery of a new world; and, just as Scott found free play for the riches of his mind only when he exchanged the verse-romance for the novel, so, also, Byron attained the full emancipation of his genius only when he turned from drama and romance to realistic and satiric narrative poetry and took as his models the works of the Italian burlesque poets from Pulci to Casti. This discovery also served to put an end to the conflict which had gone on in Byron's mind between the classic and romantic principles of art. What we see52

Byron

[CH.

is the triumph of yet a third combatant, namely realism, which, entering late into the fray, carries all before it. His latest dramas, and his verse-tale, The Island, not to mention certain romantic episodes which find a place in Don Juan, show that Byron never wholly abandoned romance, but, from the time when he wrote Beppo (1818), realism was the master-bias of his mind, while the break with classicism was complete. With this triumph of realism, satire once more comes into full play: it is no longer the formal satire of the Augustan school, such as he had essayed in English Bards and Scotch Reviewers, but burlesque satire, unconstrained and whimsical, and delighting in the sudden anticlimaxes and grotesque incongruities which find a spacious hiding-place in the ottava rima. Byron's study of Italian literature had begun long before he set foot on Italian soil, and it is curious that, first of all, he should have employed the octave stanza in his Epistle to Augusta (1816), in a mood of entire seriousness, apparently without suspecting its capacity for burlesque. It was Frere's The Monks, and the Giants (1817) which first disclosed to him, as he gratefully acknowledges1, its fitness for effects of this sort. But his true masters are the Italians themselves-Pulci in the fifteenth century, Berni in the sixteenth and Casti in the eighteenth. Except in his account of the court of Catherine II in Don Juan, Byron rarely had recourse to the Italian medley-poets for incidents of narrative; it was manner and not matter which they furnished. The temper of his mind was similar to theirs, and the mobility of his genius enabled him to reproduce with consummate ease their note of light-hearted, cynical banter, their swift transitions from grave to gay, their humourous digressions and their love of grotesque images and still more grotesque rimes. It is, moreover, questionable whether Byron would ever have written his great comic masterpieces if he had continued to live under the grey skies of England and amid the restraining conventions of English society. Beppo, from beginning to end, is steeped in the atmosphere of Italy; its mood is that of the Venetian carnival; in tone and temper it is the most alien poem in our literature. And, without Beppo, there might never have been a Don Juan. In that case, the student of Byron would have been compelled to turn to his letters for the full disclosure of his genius and personality, and for a complete understanding of the fact that 1 "1 have since written a poem (of 84 octave stanzas), humorous, in or after the excellent manner of Mr Whistlecraft (whom I take to be Frere) on a Venetian anecdote which amused me." (Letter to John Murray, 12 October 1817.)II] Beppo and The Vision of Judgment 53 Byron was infinitely greater and more versatile than the Byronic hero of the verse-tales and the plays. Those letters rank with the best in a literature singularly rich in epistolography, and, in them, we see, in boon profusion, the racy wit, the persiflage and the rare colloquial ease which reappear with dazzling effect in his later poetry. In its tolerant, almost genial, portrayal of the social licence of Italian burgess life, Beppo is the direct descendant of the Italian novella of the early renascence, while, in its truth to reality and inimitable gaiety, it rivals the Decameron. To the unwary reader, the return of Beppo, disguised as a Turkish merchant, may seem the occasion for a clash of rapiers, but nothing was farther from Byron's mind, and nothing would have destroyed more effectually that atmosphere of amused tolerance and polished irony which hangs over the poem, and keeps heroics at arm's length. The poem also shows that its author, at one step, had gained full mastery of those subtle effects of style and rime which are the peculiar light of ottava rima. In The Vision of Judgment, the verse is the same, but the mood is different. In Beppo, the satire is diffused in playful irony; here, it is direct and personal. The Vision is, indeed, matter for mirth, but Byron never conceals the spirit of bitter indignation in which the travesty was conceived. Southey's fulsome adulation of the dead monarch roused him to anger, and the anger is that of the impassioned lover of liberty who saw, in George III, the incarnation of the power of tyranny: He ever warr'd with freedom and the free: Nations as men, home subjects, foreign foes, So that they uttered the word 'Liberty!' Found George the Third their first opponent. (st. XLv.) It cannot be denied that Southey's poem readily lent itself to travesty, but this fact does not in the least diminish the perfection of Byron's constructive art or his mastery of satiric portraiture. The colloquial case of Beppo is maintained, but there are fewer digression s; while, in the description of Lucifer's approach to the gates of heaven and of his reception there by Michael, Byron momentarily rises to the dignity of the epic. One of Southey's reviewers accused him of profaneness in his attempt to 'convert the awful tribunal of Heaven into a drawing-room levee I' in which he himself plays the part of a lord-in-waiting, and it was upon this scene in Southey's Vision that Byron swooped, with an 1 See Mioore's L e and Works of Lord Byron, vol. xsi, p. 277.54

Byron

[CH.

unerring eye for burlesque effect. Of Southey's cloud of witnesses only two-Wilkes and Junius-are summoned to the judgment-seat by Byron, but the part which they play in the action is magnificently conceived and executed. The full blast of the poet's satiric humour is, however, held in reserve until Southey himself appears and recites the 'spavin'd dactyls' of his Vision to the outraged ears of the assembled ghosts and archangels; it is satire in which every line transfixes its quarry. In this concluding scene, Byron scales the heights of the most exalted form of satire-that in which keen-edged, humorous portraiture is united with transcendent constructive and narrative art. In Don Juan, the work upon which his literary powers were chiefly expended during his last five years in Italy (1818-23), Byron attains to the full disclosure of his personality and the final expression of his genius. It is impossible to quarrel with the poet's own description of it as an 'Epic Satire,' but, in the earlier cantos, at least, the satire is often held in suspense; in the 'Ave Maria' stanzas and the magnificent 'Isles of Greece' song, he gives free play to his lyricism, while, in his Juan-Haidee idyll, he fashions a love-romance as passionate as that of Romeo and Juliet and as virginal as that of Ferdinand and Miranda. In the sixteen thousand verses of Don Juan, every mood of Byron's complex and paradoxical nature is vividly reflected: here is the romanticist and the realist, the voluptuary and the cynic, the impassioned lover of liberty and the implacable foe of hypocrisy. And this variety of moods is accompanied by a no less remarkable variety of scenes. His hero is equally at home in camp and court; he suffers shipwreck and storms a fortress, penetrates the seraglio, the palace and the English country-house; and, true to his fundamental principle of obedience to nature, bears good and ill fortune with equal serenity. In a letter to captain Medwin, Byron describes his poem as an epic-' an epic as much in the spirit of our day as the Iliad was in that of Homer.' But it is an epic without a plan, and, rightly speaking, without a hero. For Don Juan is little more than the child of circumstance, a bubble tossed hither and thither on the ocean of life, ever ready to yield to external pressure, d assdrtin his own will only in his endeavour to keep his head above water Yet, Don Juan is a veritable Cornedie Hunmane, the works of a man who has stripped life of its illusions, and has learnt, through suffering and the satiety of pleasure, to look upon society with the searching eye of Chaucer and the pities s of Meephistopheles. In the comedy which is here enacted some of theII]

Don Juan

55

characters are great historic figures, others thinly veiled portraits of men and women who had helped to shape the poet's own chequered career, while others, again, are merely creatures of the imagination or serve as types of the modern civilisation with which Byron was at war. In Don Juan, Byron, in the main, is content to draw his materials out of the rich resources of his own personal experience, and it was only when experience failed him that he drew upon books. In such cases, he proved a royal borrower. It is well known that his description of the shipwreck in canto II, and of the siege of Ismail in canto vmII-where he combines the realism of Zola with the irony of Swift in his most savage mood-is very largely drawn from the narratives of actual shipwrecks and sieges recorded by voyagers or historians. What is not so familiar is the fact that the whole mise-en-scBne, together with many of the incidents, of Juan's adventures at the court of Catherine II of Russia, are drawn from Casti's satiric epic, II Poema Tartaro1, and materially add to Byron's indebtedness to the eighteenth century master of the ottava rirma. In his early manhood, Casti had spent several years at the Russian court, and, in his satire, he describes, under the thinnest of topographical disguises, the career of an Irish adventurer, Tomasso Scardassale, who has escaped with a Turkish girl from the clutches of the caliph of Bagdad, and, arriving at Ciracona (Petrograd), becomes the prime favourite of the empress Cattuna (Catherine II). The resemblance between the two poems is enhanced by the fact that many of the details in the siege of Ismail, and much of Byron's diatribe against war, find a close parallel in 11 Poema Tartaro. Judged as a work of art, Don Juan is well-nigh perfect. Byron's indebtedness to his Italian masters is almost as great in diction as ir verse, but what he borrowed he made peculiarly his own; a bold imitator, he is himself inimitable. He is triumphantly successful in the art of harmonising manner to matter and form to spirit. EIis diction, in the main, is low-toned and conversational, as befits a poem in which digression plays an important part; but it is, at the same time, a diction which is capable of sustained elevation when occasion demands, or of sinking to bathos when the end is burlesque. No less remarkable is the harmony which is established between his diction and his verse; the astonishingly clever 1 The relation of Don Juan to II Poema Tartaro was first pointed out by C. M. Fuess in his monograph, Lord Byron as a Satirist in Verse, 1912. Byron's indebtedness to Casti is, probably, even greater than Fuess thinks it wise to admit.56

Byron

[CH. II

burlesque effects which he produces with his double and triple rimes lie equally within the provinces of diction and metre, while the epigrammatic gems with which his cantos are bestrewn gain half their brilliance by being set within the bounds of the couplet that rounds off the ottava rima. It is in Byron's digressions that the reader comes nearest to him. Swift and Sterne, each in his turn, had employed the digression with telling effect in prose narrative, but Byron was the first Englishman to make a free use of it in verse. Here, again, he was under the spell of the Italians, Pulci, Berni and Casti, though the wit and humour and caustic criticism of life which find a place in these digressions are all his own. In them, the dominant mood is that of mockery. Byron, indeed, would have us believe that if I laugh at any mortal thing, 'Tis that I may not weep; but it would be idle to deny that, in these digressions, the motley of the jester, for him, was the only wear. Their very brilliance is a proof of the delight which their author found in girding at the world and waging war upon 'cant political, cant religious, cant moral.' Europe has long looked upon Byron as the inspired prophet of political liberty, but it is the Byron who wrote The Prophecy of Dante and who laid down his life in the cause of Greek freedom, rather than the author of Don Juan, that justly awakens this regard and evokes this homage. In his 'epic satire,' his criticism of life is almost wholly destructive. We take delight in his pitiless exposure of effete institutions and false ideals, and gladly acknowledge that the hammer-blows which he delivers at hypocrisy are as salutary in their effect as they are delightful to watch; but we must, at the same time, confess that he lacks the constructive genius of his friend and contemporary, Shelley, who sapped the foundations of society with equal resolution, but who razed only in order to rebuild.CHAPTER III

SHELLEY Two decades, approximately, separate the emergence of the younger group of the poets of this period, Byron, Shelley and Keats, from that of Wordsworth, Coleridge and Scott. To the elder group, all three were both deeply indebted and, in various subtle and intricate ways, akin. Yet, the younger group stand sharply and definitely apart; they are not merely of a younger generation but of a different age. The revolution, which had profoundly disturbed the elder poets, had, for the younger, already become history; the ideas and aspirations which Wordsworth and Coleridge first embraced and then did battle with, and which Scott consistently abhorred, had passed into the blood of Byron and Shelley, and kindled humanitarian ardours even in the artist Keats. And they are all, definitely, less English. Poetry, in their hands, loses almost entire touch with the national life and the historic traditions of England; nor was it mere accident that Shelley and Byron lived their best years, and produced their greatest poetry, in Italy, or that Keats, in his London suburb, sang of Endymion and the moon, of magic casements and perilous seas. For the younger group were not merely less English; they were less near to nature, in a significant and far-reaching sense less natural. Existence, as such-the world as it is, with its ritual, or routine, of use and wont-was less characteristically the home and haunt of their imagination. To brood over the poetry of common things, to explore the workings of the untaught mind, to reanimate, for its own sake, the adventure and romance of the past, were no longer their inspiring aim. Nature, to Wordsworth, was a conservative ideal; but the ideals of freedom, beauty, love, which enthralled the imagination of Byron and Shelley and Keats became, in their hands, anarchic and revolutionary, challenging the old order, breaking down its classifications and limits, yet, in the case of the two younger poets, building up visionary fabrics controlled58

She//ey

[CH.

by the law of the spirit. And their very detachment from the despotism of fact enabled them to range more freely over existence than did their predecessors; they are more versatile; neglected treasures swim into their ken; nature and art, legend and romance, lose their old solitary and exclusive lure, to become the manycoloured woof of the living garment of beauty. That which for Wordsworth was, preeminently, if not exclusively, 'a living Presence of the Earth,' spoke to the imagination of Shelley and Keats no less from painting and sculpture, from the poetry of Greeks and Elizabethans and of Boccaccio and Dante, from the splendid creations of primeval myth. Medusa and the Grecian Urn, Prometheus Unbound and the sonnet On sitting down to read King Lear once again, Isabella and The Triumph of Life, Endymion and Alastor, mark, merely in conception and cast of subject, so many advances of the existing boundaries of English poetry. Shelley and Keats were thus, for their generation, creators of beauty, as Wordsworth and Coleridge had been prophets of nature. But their vision of beauty was widely different. Shelley's vision is more metaphysical; beauty, for him, is 'intellectual,' a spirit living and working through the universe, and, ultimately, undistinguishable from the 'love' which 'sustains' it; the sensuous world, its 'veil,' discloses it, here and there, in pure, aspiring things-flowers, flame, heroic souls. The Keatsian vision of beauty, on the other hand, is predominantly a rapturous exaltation of the senses-but of senses transfigured by imagination, so that they create as much as they perceive, making 'loveliness yet more lovely.' Both the Shelleyan and the Keatsian vision of beauty are mirrored, finally, in the poetic instrument of expression itself, in their speech and verse. Image and personification, condemned by Wordsworth, reappear in unsurpassed subtlety and splendour. But both are masters, also, of a noble and passionate simplicity. And, in both, the inner rhythm of thought is accompanied and borne out by new and exquisite rhythms of musical verse. The songs of Shelley and the odes of Keats reach the summit of lyric achievement in English. Percy Bysshe Shelley, born on 4 August 1792, at Horsham, came of a line of frequently notable Sussex squires. His imagination was early awake, but poetic power came relatively late. At Eton (1804-10), he wrote fluent Latin verse, hung entranced over the forbidden marvels of chemistry, stood up single-handed against fagging, and scribbled incoherent romances after Mrs, RadcliffeIII]

Alastor

59

(Zastrozzi, St Irvyne's); there, too, he had that May morning vision of 'intellectual beauty' (Hymn to Intellectual Beauty, dedication to The Revolt of Islam) which 'burst his spirit's sleep,' and became, thenceforward, the ' master light of all his seeing.' The circumstances of his brief Oxford career, his expulsion and marriage with Harriet Westbrook (August 1811) are familiar, and need not be recalled. In January 1812, he wrote to Godwin, declaring himself 'the pupil of him under whose actualguidance my very thoughts have hitherto been arranged.' Godwin's sway, never entirely outgrown, over a mind remote from his own in gifts and temperament, was due to his political individualism and to his ethical determinism. The one appealed to Shelley's hatred of tyranny, the other to his passion for ideal unity. In Queen Mab (surreptitiously published 1813), his Godwinian creed is proclaimed from the mouths of legendary personages, inspired, as is their loose irregular verse, by the mythical epics of Southey. Shelley was soon to leave Queen Mcab far behind; yet, its passionate sincerity, and the indefinable promise of genius in its very extravagances, make it very impressive. Some sections he, later, rehandled as The Daemon of the World. The following year (1814) saw the gravest crisis of his life. Its circumstances cannot be discussed here. Finding Harriet spiritually irresponsive, and believing her to have been unfaithful, he treated their marriage as dissolved, and, in July, left England with Mary Godwin. Neither the three months' tour through France and Switzerland, nor the succeeding winter and spring, bore any immediate literary fruit; but, during the autumn of 1815, he wrote, in the glades of Windsor, Alastor, his first authentic and unmistakable poem. The harsh notes and crude philosophy of Queen Mab are no longer heard; Southey has yielded place to Coleridge and Wordsworth, to the romantic chasm of Kubla Khan, and the visionary boy of The Excursion. The blank verse, too, is built upon the noble, plain music of Wordsworth, but with delicate suspensions and cadences and wayward undulations of his own. Yet, the mood and purport of this first genuine achievement of Shelley is one of frustration and farewell. His reform schemes had utterly failed, and he believed (on the strength of a medical report) that he was about to die. Alastor is the tragedy of the idealist who seeks in reality the counterpart of his ideal. In his preface, Shelley loftily condemns the idealist, but only to pronounce a sterner condemnation upon the multitude who live untroubled by generous delusions; and the final lines, some of the noblest he ever wrote, are penetrated with the forlornness of a world where60 Shelley [CH. 'many worms and beasts and men live on,' while 'some surpassing spirit' is snatched away, leaving to the survivors But cold despair and pale tranquillity, Nature's vast frame, the web of human things, Birth and the grave, that are not as they were. To Shelley himself, 'Nature's vast frame' and 'the web of human things' were not only a source of consolation: they were a problem-a problem, however, of which he was assured that he had the key. Much of this autumn was occupied with attempts to set out in prose his philosophic convictions. The results remain in a series of unfinished prose essays: On Love, On life, On a Future State, On Metaphysics, On Morals, On Christianity. Neither as literature nor as speculation are they very remarkable; but they help to determine the character of Shelley's doctrines at a time when the Godwinian mould of his ideas, still almost untouched by the influence of either Spinoza or Plato, was already undergoing the implicit transmutation in his mind which familiarity with them, and especially with Plato, splendidly completed. His determinism remains, but is assuming a more and more idealist complexion. 'Necessity,' with Godwin a bulwark against miracles and freewill, was already, in Queen Mab, a sublime creation and harmonising power 'the mother of the world,' and life 'the great miracle.' Shelley believes, with Berkeley, that 'nothing exists but as it is perceived,' and reduces mind to a merely perceiving power; but, in another context, he can assert that man has 'a spirit within him at enmity with nothingness and dissolution.' And the Godwinian individualism is in sore peril when Shelley, in the same essay (On life), declares that 'I, you, they are not signs of any actual difference,... but merely marks employed to denote the different modifications of the one mind.' The author of these fragments was clearly ripe for Plato, and the ardent Greek studies of the following winter with Hogg and Peacock brought his later Platonism perceptibly nearer. The Swiss journey of the following summer (1816) was memorable for the beginning of his friendship with Byron. To these months of animated intercourse with a man of genius very unlike his owndiscussions and readings in the villa Diodati, boat explorations in the footsteps of Julie and St Preux and much else-Shelley owed stimulus; but, not like Byron, a poetic new birth. The Mont Blanc stanzas and the Hymn to Intellectual Beauty mark no such sudden heightening of vision or matured power as do Manfred and the third canto of Childe Harold in comparisonIll]

The Revolt of Islam

with all the writer had done before. Yet they express the Shelleyan idealism with a new loftiness of assurance, as of one who had found his dreams unassailably confirmed. The Alps, for Byron a symbol of nature's ruinous and savage force, were, for Shelley, the habitation of 'the secret Strength of Things Which governs thought and to the infinite dome of heaven is as a law' -a bond of union, like Wordsworth's Duty, between the visible universe and the ideal strivings of man. The state of England during the winter which followed (1816-17) offered little support to this optimism. The overthrow of Napoleon had brought about, for the English working class, a period of intense and widespread misery. Reaction had triumphed, but the country had never been nearer to revolution. Shelley, settled with Mary at Marlow on Thames, coped energetically and generously with the need around him, pouring out his thoughts, meantime, in a great revolutionary epic. Laon and Cythna (later renamed The Revolt of Islam), the work of these summer months, is a brilliant dream-woof of poetry, in which are wrought figures, now purely allegoric, like the eagle and the snake-the evil and the noble cause-now symbolic, like the hero and the heroine themselves, who wage the eternal war of love and truth against tyranny. Shelley's boundless faith in the might of spiritual forces permeates and suffuses the whole poem, and to such a degree that the opposing and resisting powers remain shadowy and incredible. In vain the most savage tortures and, finally, death at the stake are inflicted upon Laon and Cythna; we seem to be onlookers at a visionary spectacle in which hate is impotent and pain dissolved in ecstasy. Not till The Cenci did Shelley, handling a real story, imagine with corresponding power the antagonist of his heroic spirit, and thus attain true and great drama. The Faerie Qieene, which he read to Mary during these months, counted for something in the substance as well as in the form. Cythna is the woman warrior, a Britomart of heroic valour and impassioned purity; but her ideals are those of a more modern time; she seeks, like Mary Wollstonecraft, the intellectual liberation of her sex, and she is mated with Laon in a comradeship of sister spirits such as now bound Mary WTollstonecraft's daughter to Shelley. The tenderly intimate dedication to his wife nobly commemorates, also, her mother and her father. Kindred impulses inspired the fragment Prince Athanase, written, likewise, at Marlow. Athanase is a Laon transposed-so far as the unfinished poem discloses-in a quieter key. The eternal62 Shelley [CH. warfare of the idealist must, in some sort, have been its theme, and the triumph of love its climax; but its most distinct pictures are not of bridal rapture or martyr ecstasy, but of philosophic converse between a young disciple and a 'divine old man' who has nurtured him in the 'soul-sustaining songs' of ancient Hellas and in the wisdom of the Symposium. Yet, Shelley's personal history during these months would have excused a note of more unequivocal tragedy, a confidence less exalted in the final triumph of love. The chancery suit brought by the Westbrooks for the custody of his and Harriet's children threw him into an agony of apprehension. The threatened loss of the children touched him less acutely than the consequent ruin, as he deemed it, of their souls. Harriet's suicide towards the close of 1816 had affected him little. He had long ceased to love her, and the pathos of her miserable end failed to touch the springs of his flowing compassion. The cruelty of his situation makes the fierce stanzas To the Lord Chancellor impressive; but they are hardly great poetry. Before Lord Eldon's decree was pronounced, Shelley and Mary had resolved to leave the country. In March 1818, they set out for Italy. The stanzas To William Shelley, though probably written before, breathe the exultant joy and the ideal hope which qualified for them the regrets of exile. Rosalind and Helen, begun at Marlow and finished next summer at the baths of Lucca, has caught little of this afflatus. It is a Shelleyan essay in the romantic tale to which Scott and Byron had lent a vogue. The influence of Christabel is often felt in the rhythm, but there is no archaism of style. Shelley calls it, indeed, 'a modern eclogue,' and he experiments, fitfully and somewhat awkwardly, with the familiar, colloquial manner which he was to make consonant with poetry in Julian and Maddalo and the Gisborne letter. In Italy, this manner grew steadily stronger and richer. The incidents of Rosalind and Helen, however, read like a bad dream of the Marlow days: Rosalind's child is ravished from her, Helen's lover fades and dies as Shelley and Mary believed was soon to be his own destiny. And the close, with its air of mellowed and assuaged suffering, and its sudden opulence of style, reads like an awakening amidst the radiance and the security of Italy. 'Lo, where red morning thro' the wood Is burning o'er the dew!" says Rosalind, symbolically. But the spell of Italy first becomes fully apparent in the poemsIll]

Venice and Este

63

written during this summer at Byron's villa near Este-a nest, after Shelley's own heart, on the jutting brink of a ravine commanding the Lombard plain, the Adriatic, the towers of Venice and Padua, the far-off Alps and Apennines and the flame-like Euganean peaks close at hand. Nature had here, at length, gone out to meet him, creating visibly before him a scene which might have been a projection of his imagination. Lines written among the Euganean Hills express the rapt mood of a mind 'wedded,' as Wordsworth's habitually, as Shelley's rarely, was, with 'this goodly universe'; his soul, which so long Darkened this swift stream of song, grows one with the glowing noontide sky and with the flowerglimmering at his feet. The experience is still strange to him and he half questions whether it be more than the visionary fancy of his mind 'peopling' a 'lone' and empty world. He stands in 'a flowering island' of the spirit; but round it surge 'the waters of wide Agony,' and he is soon to be adrift upon these waters again. In misery, he, like Tennyson, woos sorrow 'as a bride,' but with a half-playful sadness wholly his own. And even the 'unspeakable beauty of Naples,' deeply as it impressed him, could not exorcise the moods of deep dejection which found utterance in the poignant Stanzas written there. At Venice, on the other hand, where he renewed his old comradeship with Byron, the bitter cynicism of the elder poet called out in protest all Shelley's faith and hope for men. Julian and Maddalo gives a fascinating account, undoubtedly true in substance, of their intimate talk; and the memories of real debate which underlie it helped Shelley to a speech unwontedly natural and familiar, and to verse which gives full play to the free movement of conversational sentences, yet turns its freedom into ever fresh occasions for rhythmic beauty. In the maniac's story, recounted to the two poets, conversation, naturally, gives way to narrative; but, with the conversational tone, the easy grace also passes from the style, and the delicate variety of pause from the verse. In the previous year, Byron had made his first essay in the poetic-familiar, and his, too, was a Venetian story; but there is little affinity between the cynical and ironic gaiety of Beppo and Shelley's high-bred ease and charm, or between its smart metallic ringing rimes and Shelley's undulating music. From Este, Shelley turned south once more, arriving, early in 1819, at Rome. Many vivid letters to Peacock and the Stanzas written in dejection, near Naples (December 1818), already64 Shelley [CH. mentioned, make the journey live for us. Since his arrival in Italy, he had brooded over the plan of a lyrical drama. Three subjects, Mrs Shelley reports, attracted him: Tasso, Job, Prometheus. Of the first two, only a fragment of Tasso remains; but the fact helps to define his line of approach to the one which he finally adopted and carried into execution. In all three, a noble character suffers grievous things at the hands, or by the consent, of a superior allpowerful will. There is tragedy, of varying quality, in the situation of all three. The sublime figure of Job, visited with immeasurable sufferings, but resisting all appeals to submission, alone in all literature matched the heroic grandeur of the Aeschylean Prometheus. But that this last subject finally prevailed is not surprising. Aeschylus had been his constant companion since he crossed the Alps, in the spring of the previous year. The typical Shelleyan situation-an ideal hero confronting a tyrant-was far more unequivocally present in the Prometheus story than in the rest. And this story offered an opening for the doctrine, yet more intimately Shelleyan, of love as the central principle of things and the key to the ideal future of humanity. The figure of Prometheus had appealed powerfully to other idealists of the revolutionary age. Goethe, in his storm and stress phase, had seen in him the human creator, shaping men in his own image and scorning God; and Beethoven found noble music for the theme. To Byron, in 1816, he was a symbol of the divineness, the heroic endurance and the 'funereal destiny' of man. To Shelley, also, he stood for man creating and enduring, endowing the gods themselves with wisdom and strength, and suffering their vindictive rage. But, for Shelley, no symbol of humanity could suffice which excluded the perfected man of the future he confidently foresaw. Aeschylus had made Prometheus finally surrender to Jupiter, and become reconciled with him. This conclusion was, to Shelley, intolerable. The moral interest of the fable [he declares] would be annihilated if we could conceive him unsaying his high language, and quailing before his successful and perfidious adversary. The story thus had to undergo a radical transformation to fit it to Shelley's boundless faith in the perfectibility of man. His Godwinian creed had, in this respect, undergone no abatement whatever. Pain, death and sin were transitory ills. Religion, too, man would necessarily outgrow, for the gods were phantoms devised by his brain. A Prometheus who should symbolise humanity thus conceived necessarily triumphed; there was evenIII]

Prometheus Unbound

65

danger lest his adversary's overthrow-at bottom, a fight with a figment-should appear too certain and too easy. And this danger was not diminished by the specifically Shelleyan traits which transformed the substance without altering the outline of Godwinian man, and changed the being of pure reason into the being of absolute love; making earth no mere source of human utilities, but the mother 'interpenetrated' in every pore of her granite mass with love like his own. The sublime doctrine of love was foreign to Aeschylus and to Greek myth, no less than to Godwin; but the legend which made Prometheus the son of Earth provided Shelley with a pregnant symbol for his thought. The earthborn Titan must partake of the spirit of love which pervades the earth. Even towards his enemy Jupiter, he cannot, therefore, be implacable. Yet, since Jupiter stands for the power of evil which it is his task and destiny to destroy, he cannot be placated. The allegorical and the literal sense thus thrust the story in different directions. Prometheus acts, in part, as the spirit of love, hating, ipso facto, the spirit of hate, and ruthlessly pursuing it to its doom; in part, as the sublime Christ-like sufferer, who wishes 'no living thing to suffer pain,' and will not curse even his persecutor. In the great first act, hanging in torture on the cliffs of Caucasus, he seeks to recall the curse upon Jupiter which he had once pronounced, and to which all nature had listened appalled. But he will not disclose the secret which alone can avert Jupiter's ruin. To the threats and arguments of Mercury-in the most Aeschylean and least undramatic scene of the poem-and to the torments of the furies, he remains inflexible. The catastrophe accordingly follows; Jupiter topples from his throne, as it were, at a touch; indeed, the stroke of doom is here so instantaneous and so simple as to be perilously near the grotesque. Jupiter's fall is the signal for the regeneration, no less instantaneous, of humanity; man's evil nature slips off like a slough; Prometheus is 'unbound.' But this symbolism leaves the character of Prometheus incompletely portrayed. To be chained and set free is but a slender portion of his suffering or of his joy. His keenest pangs-the last resource of the furies when other torments fail-are of the soul, pity for the sufferings of other men, and, worse than blood and fire, pity for their deadly apathy: Hypocrisy and Custom make their minds The fanes of many a worship now outworn. They dare not devise good for man's estate, And yet they know not that they do not dare.

ER L. XII. CH. III.

566 Shelley [CH. And, as his pains are spiritual, so, while he is still bound, are his joys. The earth, his mother, sends the spirits of heroes and martyrs to cheer him; lovely phantasmal shapes of faith and hope hover round him; and he knows that there awaits him, still afar and invisible, his bride, Asia, the spirit of love in nature-' Lamp of the earth,' 'whose footsteps pave the world with light'-but whose transforming presence will fade 'unless it be mingled with his own.' The love that is 'blindly wove through all the web of being' is incomplete until the love that pervades nature has also triumphed in man made 'one harmonious soul of many a soul.' Long before that blissful hour arrived, nature and man had mingled in the glowing speech of poetry; into her 'golden chalice,' when his being overflowed, he poured the 'bright wine' of his impassioned thought. Such moments Prometheus remembers, though Asia is afar, and 'vain all hope but love.' Prometheus has thus, from the first, 'great allies'; even when anguish is loudest, a hushed rapture of expectation is not far off. Everything in the drama seems to support the faith of Shelley's most exalted hours, that love, even here and now, is the substance of things, and evil a phantasmal shadow. In such hours, we know, it was written: the vigorous awakening of the Roman spring around him as he wrote, and 'the new life with which it drenches the spirits even to intoxication, were the inspiration of this drama'; The speech is almost everywhere lyrical in temper where not in form, and the ardour of Shelley suffuses itself into the atmosphere, compelling even the forces of evil to speak in accents like his, as if secretly persuaded of the fatuity of their own cause. Jupiter speaks in lovely images of stars and sun, as if he, too, were a lover of Asia, the lamp of earth; the fury, in the very act of tormenting Prometheus, speaks as one who herself suffers what she inflicts. Finally, in the fourth act, added as an afterthought, some months later, this implicit lyricism becomes a sustained rapture of song. Considered as the closing act of a drama, it is otiose, for it adds nothing to the action; but it is rather to be regarded as the final movement of a symphony; a completion necessary in the logic of emotion, though superfluous in the logic of event. In the great choric songs of the earth and the moon, and in the triumphant strains of the hours and the spirits of the mind, Shelley reaches the sublimest note of his lyric. No modern poet has come nearer than he to making 'the morning stars sing together.' Almost all his other modes of song, from the simplest to the most intricate, are to be found in the earlier acts; and on the deep organIII]

The Cenci

67

tone of Demogorgon, proclaiming that love and wisdom and endurance are of the eternal truth of things, the poem closes. Prometheus Unbound is not to be judged as an essay in the philosophy of progress; but neither is it to be treated merely as a tissue of lovely imagery and music. Shelley's ardour, fortified and misled by the cold extravagances of Godwin, hurried him over the slow course of social evolution. He conceived both the evil in human nature and the process of overcoming it with strange, sublime simplicity. But the ideal of love and endurance, which he sees fulfilled by regenerated man, stands on a different plane; it is rooted in existing human nature, and expresses a state towards which all genuine progress must advance. And, when he portrays the universe as at one with the moral strivings of man, he is uttering no fugitive or isolated extravagance, but the perennial faith of idealists in all ages. Under forms of thought derived from the atheist and materialist Godwin, Shelley has given, in Prometheus Unbound, magnificent expression to the faith of Plato and of Christ. Though written at Rome, Prometheus does not bear any direct trace of its origin. Any other flowering glades than those that crowned the baths of Caracalla, and any other glowing Italian sky, would have provided a like intoxicating milieu. Nor was Shelley easily accessible to the specific traditions and character of Rome. It was no city of the soul for him, as for Byron, but a beautiful tomb, 'where empires and religions lie buried in the ravage they have wrought'; and neither Vergil nor Lucretius, nor Lucan-a name more honoured by Shelley than either-availed to endear to him the metropolis of papacy. But one tradition of modern Rome had, since his arrival in Italy, moved his deepest interest. The story of Beatrice Cenci, in a form, as is now known, more favourable to her than history warrants, was universally current among the Roman populace, and 'not to be mentioned in Roman society without awakening a deep and breathless interest.' Guido's portrait of Beatrice, in the Colonna palace, heightened Shelley's passionate sympathy with her personality. Her story was already a tragedy, and 'nothing remained, as I imagined, but to clothe it to the apprehensions of my countrymen in such language and action as would bring it home to their hearts.' To bring his thoughts and convictions home to the hearts of his countrymen had never been an aim foreign to Shelley; but he had never, as now, subordinated his own artistic bent and technique to this aim. Though distrustful of his power to write a drama for the stage, he yet chose this 5-268 SheAley [CH. incomparable means of popular appeal; and he held his visionary imagination in severe control, avoiding all 'mere poetry,' and using a speech which differs from the 'familiar speech of men' only in its nobler, more classical, simplicity. That Shelley, after a few weeks' interval, could carry out, with unfaltering hand, and with supreme success, a poetic transition not less astonishing than would have been the appearance of Samson Agonistes on the morrow of Comus, marks his will power no less than his imaginative range. The central theme and situation of The Cenci are still, it is true, the heroic resistance to tyranny, of all situations the most kindling to Shelley. It is no longer a mythic symbol, however, but an actual event. And the chief actor and sufferer is a woman. Shelley, by merely following the lead of his own ardent and indignant sympathy, struck out a tragic type in effect new, and to none of the great masters stranger than to Shakespeare himself. Euripides, Sophocles, Massinger, Webster had nobly handled the tragedy of heroic womanhood; but neither Medea nor Antigone, nor Vittoria, nor Dorothea, nor the duchess of Malfi anticipated Beatrice Cenci in her way of meeting an intolerable wrong. She strikes down the criminal, not with the fierce vengeance of a Medea, but as the instrument of divine justiceBecause my father's honour did demand My father's life. This is the Shelleyan magnanimity, and Shelley found no hint of it in his source. But he wove into her character every positive trait that it supplied; his Beatrice, therefore, with all her ideal greatness of soul, is no abstraction, but an Italian girl, with flashing moods and impulses. She thinks, in her agony, of suicideLucretia's remedy-before she finds her own; she is as sure as Antigone that her guilt is innocence, yet fights her accusers with the rare cunning of an advocate; she confronts the faltering murderers with more than the fierce energy of Lady Macbeth, yet has her moment of a young girl's anguish at the thought of passing for ever from the sunshine into a 'wide, grey, lampless, deep, unpeopled world.' Analysis may pronounce this or that trait inconsistent; but the qualified reader will feel himself in the grip of a character of Shakespearean richness of texture, irradiated through and through by a flawless splendour of soul. If Beatrice recalls Greek, as well as Elizabethan, analogies, count Cenci is of the race of the Barabbases and Volpones who mark the extremest divergence of Elizabethan from Greek tragedy. Yet, he is drawn with a reticence of which no Elizabethan wouldIII]

Politics

69

have been capable, and the horror of his act is so far mitigated that its motive is hate, not lust. He has moments almost of sublimity, in which his hate appears a tragic doom: The act I think shall soon extinguish all For me: I bear a darker deadlier gloom Than the earth's shade, or interlunar air; or in which he imagines his piled wealth making a flaming pyre out in the wide Campagna; which done, My soul, which is a scourge, will I resign Into the hands of him who wielded it. The Cenci owes more to Shelley's intense self-projection into a real story profoundly sympathetic to him than to conscious imitation of any master or school. If the Elizabethans were most in his mind, the absorbing interest for him of the person and the fate of his heroine checked any disposition to diffuseness of plot or luxury of style. No secondary interest gets foothold for a moment; the mother and brothers, even the hapless Bernardo, are distinctly, if faintly, drawn; but their fate hardly moves us beside that of Beatrice. And, if the Greeks, too, were in his mind, the same passionate championship effectually overcame any Hellenic disposition to find a relative justification for both contending parties. Cenci was beyond apology; but a blindly scrupulous, instead of a basely mercenary, pope would have strengthened the play. And a play Shelley did, in fact, intend it to be. In Beatrice Cenci, he actually had in mind the great tragic actress Eliza O'Neill, and, in sending the MS to the lessee of Covent Garden, intimated his desire that she should play it. Harris, as was inevitable, declined the proposal, but invited its author to write a play for him on some other subject. Shelley was already, however, absorbed in other tasks. 'I have deserted the odorous gardens of literature,' he wrote, 'for the great sandy desert of politics.' From that 'desert,' in truth, he had never averted his ken. And the provocation to enter it was now unusually great. Popular hostility to the government, fomented by the horrors of the factory system, the oppressiveness of the corn laws and the high-handed toryism of the ministry, had, in 1819, become acute. The Peterloo affair (16 August) roused Shelley's fierce indignation, and, in brief serried stanzas as of knotted whipcord, he lashed the man whom he chose to hold responsible for the threatened revolution. The Masque of Anarchy is much more, however, than a derisive arraignment of the arch-' anarch' Castlereagh. Of Shelley's finest vein of poetry, it contains few70 She/Zey [CH. hints; but, without it, we should more unreservedly discredit his sense for the realities of a free national life. From the visionary freedom of Prometheus, this practical and attainable freedom of the 'comely table spread' and the 'neat and happy home' is as far removed as is the human tragedy of the Cenci palace from the mythic pangs of the pale sufferer on Caucasus. The publication, the same autumn, of Wordsworth's Peter Bell (written in 1798) drew an outburst of sardonic mockery, not the less bitter for its sportive form, upon the tory poet. It had already been reviewed by Hunt (whose notice Shelley read 'with great amusement') and parodied by J. H. Reynolds. In Peter Bell the Third, Shelley attacks at once the reactionary politician and the 'dull' poet, but the reactionary who had once hailed with rapture the 'dawn' of the revolution, and the dull poet who had once stood on the heights of poetry. And the two indictments, for Shelley, hung together. Wordsworth was dull because he had been false to his early ideals. To convey this by identifying the poet with Peter Bell, his own symbol of the dull man, was an ingenious satiric device and not unfair retribution. Under cover of it, moreover, Shelley delivers (in part iv) some shafts of criticism which illuminate as well as pierce, and he can pointedly recall the older Wordsworth who made songs on moor and glen and rocky lake And on the heart of man. In the most elaborate of these satires, on the other hand, the quasiAristophanic drama Swellfoot the Tyrant (1820), on the scandal of George IV and the queen, Shelley's humour crackles drearily. Its hideous symbolism is unredeemed. In the meantime (January 1820), the Shelleys had moved to Pisa, their home, with occasional intervals by the sea or in the mountains, for the next two years. His vaster poetic schemes during the first of these years fell into the background; Prometheus and The Cenci had no successors. But he was himself in the full tide of growth; in lyric, at least, he now showed a finished mastery which, even in his great lyric drama, he had not always reached; and he struck out upon fresh and delightful adventures. In The Sensitive Plant, the loveliness of an Italian flower garden in spring, and its autumn decay, inspired a Shelleyan myth, akin in purport to Alastor, but with a new, delicate plasticity, like that of the contemporary Skylark. His flowers, commonly impressionist hints of colour and perfume, are now finely articulated and characterised; they are Shelleyan flowers, but, like those of Shakespeare, they are, recognisably, nature's too. In 'the sensitiveIII]

The Witch of Atlas

71

plant' itself, Shelley found a new symbol for his own 'love of love,' 'companionless,' like the poet in Alastor and the 'one frail form' of Adonais; and, as in Adonais, the mood of lament at the passing of beauty and the seeming frustration of love merges in a note of assurance, here not ecstatic but serene, that beauty and love are, in reality, the eternal things. The anapaestic verse is nearer than any other to that of Christabel; it lent itself with, perhaps, excessive ease to the fluid undulations of Shelley's rhythms, but he discovers in it new and exquisite effects. The Witch of Atlas is a more airily playful essay in poetic myth-making. Imagined on a solitary mountain climb, after days spent in translating the delightful rogueries of the Homeric Hymn to Mercury, The Witch is a hymn in kindred vein: the deeper harmonies of his thought and aspiration transposed into blithe irresponsible fancy and dainty arabesque. But poetry it remains, despite some menace of the mock-heroic at the outset, and of satire at the end. The ottava rima which Shelley uses here, as for his Hymn to Mercury, had, for centuries, been the accepted measure, in Italian, of playful poetry; and Byron had lately adopted it for the epic mockery of Don Juan. Tradition and example helped to suspend here the 'shrill' and 'intense' notes of Shelley's poetry; but they set no check upon the wayward loveliness of his music and imagery. To his wife, as is well known, the poem did not appeal; it could have no apter prelude than the charming 'apology' in which he bids her prithee for this one time Content thee with a visionary rhyme. A few other experiments in narrative of the same timeA Vision of the Sea, Orpheus, Cosimo and Fiordispina-open up alluring glimpses of beauty, but, on the whole, confirm the impression that story with difficulty sustained itself in Shelley's imagination unless it partook of the tone and temper of lyric. The first-named is a kind of Shelleyan Ancient Mariner, woven of beauty and horror, but less 'visionary,' in the sense which troubled Mrs Shelley, than The Witch of Atlas; and the anapaests crash and surge-a new potency in a metre of which only the liquid melodious lilt had appeared to be known to the poet of The Cloud and The Sensitive Plant. Shelley's passion for the sea was beginning to impress his poetry. These adventures in poetic tale, however, even when highly fortunate, like The Witch, did not draw their inspiration from the depths of Shelley's nature. They were experiments in artistry, exercises of72 Shelley [c' his now ripe expressive power. But his artistry was also summoned to the service of his political and social ideals. The revolutionary fervour which, in the previous year, had provoked his satires and squibs, now clothes itself in the intricate rhythms of the Pindaric ode. The odes To Naples and To Liberty contain splendid bursts of poetry, such as epode I B of the first, and the Athens stanza (v) of the second; but do not, as complete poems, overcome the obstacle to poetry presented by the abstract and political themes from which he set out. The Ode to the West Wind, on the other hand, originates directly in that impassioned intuition which is the first condition of poetry; the wild autumn wind sweeping through the forest possesses his imagination and becomes a living symbol of the spiritual forces which regenerate the fading or decadent life of nations, bring succour and 'alliance' to forlorn heroic spirits, and scatter their burning words, 'like ashes from an unextinguished hearth,' among mankind. Nowhere does Shelley's voice reach a more poignantly personal note or more perfect spontaneity. Yet, this ode is no less his masterpiece in calculated symmetry of structure, matching here the artistry of Keats's Grecian Urn or Autumn. The 'Titan in a virgin's form' (so Leopardi called him) finds consummate utterance in this great song, where we hear together the forlorn wail and the prophetic trumpet-blast. The symbolism, here, is too individual and too passionate to resemble the instinctive rendering of natural phenomena in terms of conscious life, which we call 'myth.' But, much of Shelley's loveliest lyric, as has often been observed, does provoke this comparison. Arethusa, and the Hymns of Apollo and Pan, are of a serene and radiant beauty almost untouched by the personal note, whether of pathos or of prophecy. And, in The Cloud, Shelley quits the guidance of Greek divinities, and, with superb and joyous ease, makes myth for himself. There is nothing esoteric in this cloud's life; all the familiar aspects of the cloud which 'changes but cannot die' are translated by a kind of brilliant poetic wit into plastic image. Hence, in part, its universal appeal. In The Skylark, closely akin in the entrancing swiftness and subtlety of its music, the temper is wholly unlike. The skylark is divine, as the cloud is immortal; but, instead of personating it, the poet looks up with wistful longing to its 'clear keen joyance,' its love which had never known love's sad satiety. The brief, quivering pulsations of the verse contrast with the superb, pacing measure of The Cloud. The second year at Pisa (1821) brought new friendships andIII]

Epipsychidion

73

interests; and Shelley's poetry, henceforth, is more largely coloured, or even inspired, by personal intimacy. The Letter to Maria Gisborne, of the preceding August, had commemorated a purely intellectual friendship. Unlike Pope's Epistle to Arbuthnot-its only rival among English letters in verse-it 'imitates' neither Horace nor anyone else, but, on the contrary, reveals, with transparent and spontaneous frankness, the Shelley of sparkling and sprightly converse, of fun shot through with poetry, and poetry with fun, of human thoughtfulness, and keen common-sense, whom only his best friends knew. Epipsychidion, Adonais and the lyrics written to Jane Williams are monuments of kinds of friendship more passionate and more individually Shelleyan, yet as diverse as the poetry which enshrines them. Shelley had lately translated the Symposium of Plato. In Emilia Viviani, he thought he saw realised the visionary beauty which, from 'youth's dawn,' had beckoned and whispered to him in all the wonder and romance of the world. A similar apparition had, at least once before, crossed his path, in the wife whom he still sincerely, if not passionately, loved. The situation was complex, and not in all its aspects favourable to poetry. The rejected fragments show that he did not without effort refrain from the mere defiant bravado of one facing a groundless or specious charge. In what remains, nothing is ignoble, nothing prosaic; but the passages in which he is explaining and justifying are distinguished by their plainer phrasing from those in which, as in the rapturous close, he soars, with beating wings, above earth and its laws and limits to pierce into the rare universe of love. The Godwinian doctrine of free love is, doubtless, discernible, on a last analysis, in the justification; but that doctrine is taken up into the sublime Platonic faith that love permeates the universe, and cannot, therefore, be completely mirrored in the facet of any one human form. Thus, in defending his passion for Emilia, Shelley is led to an argument which cuts away the ground of the exclusive and absorbing adoration of her which much of his language suggests. She is no mere symbol; her womanhood and her beauty are real; but beauty more universal and enduring than her own is gathered up in her, as light in the sun, and this ideal value, though the emphasis fluctuates, is never absent from Shelley's thought. Yet, the comparison which he invokes with the Vita Nuova is not wholly just; the virginal passion of Dante repudiates every suggestion of union, even in marriage; while Shelley's spiritual passion finds adequate utterance only in the rapt imagery of possession.74 SheAley [CH. The romance of Emilia Viviani had a somewhat sordid sequel, and Shelley felt the bitterness of disillusionment. But illusion had brought him thought, vision and song, which were not illusory. Epipsychidion enshrines a rare and strange mode of feeling, accessible only to the few; we pass, nevertheless, into a larger air when we turn from this Platonist bridal hymn to the great elegy with which, a few weeks later, he commemorated the death of Keats. The two poets had never been intimate, and neither thought of the other's poetry, as a whole, so highly as it deserved. But Shelley put Hyperion on a level with the grandest poetry of his time. Grief for a dead friend has hardly more part in Adonais than in Lycidas; but it is, in a far greater degree, an impassioned lament for a poet. The death of Edward King gave Milton an occasion for a meditation of unequalled splendour upon poetic fame; the death of Keats is felt by Shelley as a calamity for poetry, and for everything in nature and humanity to which poetry gives enduring expression, and the very soul of poetry seems to utter itself, now in sorrow, now in retributive indignation, through his lips. It is something more than literary artifice, or the example of antique elegy, that leads him to picture muses and seasons, dreams, desires and adorations, joining in his lament. All he had loved and moulded into thought From shape and hue and odour and sweet sound Lamented Adonais; and, Adonais being, for Shelley, chiefly the poet of Hyperion, his chief mourner is the heavenly muse Urania. Even the persons who are represented beside his grave, Byron, Hunt, Moore, Shelley himself, are there not as friends but as fellow-poets. The stately Spenserian stanza, to which Shelley communicates a new magnificence of his own, accords well with the grandeur of the theme. Solitary as he was, and echoless as his song, for the moment, remained, he knew that he was speaking out of the heart of humanity, and not merely 'antheming a lonely grief.' And, in the triumphant closing movement, he gave expression more sublime than either Milton or any ancient elegist had found, to the immortality of poetry. The poet, like the lover, could transcend the limits of personality, and become at one with eternal things. It was in the spirit of these magnificent vindications of poet and lover, and during the". interval between them, that Shelley wrote (February-March 1821) his memorable Defence of Poetry. Peacock's essay, The Four Ages of Poetry, in Ollier's Literary Miscellany, 1820, had stirred him to a 'sacred rage' by representingIII]

Last Poems

75

the revival of imagination, in his day, as a futile reversion to the infantine culture of primitive man. Not poetry alone, as ordinarily understood, but ethics, the very meaning of conduct, of history, nay, of life itself, was, for Shelley, at stake; and his Defence ranges far beyond the scope of literature. Poetry reveals the order and beauty of the universe; it is impossible without imagination and without love, and these are the secret, also, of all goodness, of all discovery, of all creation. 'A man to be greatly good, must imagine intensely and comprehensively... the great secret of morals is love.' The Defence is a noble statement not only of Shelley's own poetic ideals, but (despite some ambiguity of expression) of what is most poetic in poetry at large. In the flights of lovely song which came from Shelley during the later Pisan time, and the three months by the Spezzian bay which followed, the note of magnificent confidence which sounds in the close of Adonais, and in the Defence, is more rarely heard. Most of them are inspired by his tender intimacy with Jane Williams; a 'desire of the moth for the star,' which touched even the happiest of them with the sense of futility. Frailty and evanescence are now the lot of all lovely things. The flower that smiles today, tomorrow dies; the light of the shattered lamp lies dead in the dust; the spirit of delight is a rare visitor. And these thoughts are enshrined in verse of a like impalpable tenuity, unsubstantial as a rose-petal, and floating on a subtler, more tremulous and evasive music. For the splendid rhythmical sweep of The Cloud, we have the plaintive suspensions and resumptions of the music of When the lamp is shattered. Here and there, as in Lines to Edward Williams ('The serpent is shut out from Paradise'), the plaintiveness becomes a bitter cry, or, again, it gives way to playful charm, as in Aziola; only the Lines on Napoleon's death ('What! alive and so bold, O Earth?') have a resonant and ringing music. With this requiem, blended of anger and admiration, for the fallen conqueror, was published the lyrical drama Hellas, inspired by the Greek war of liberation. Hellas is, indeed, a prolonged lyric, conveyed partly through dialogue as impassioned as the choric songs. The famous last chorus is the noblest example of Shelley's command, when he chose, of a classic simplicity and close-knit strength of speech. The unfinished drama Charles I, which occupied much of the later months at Pisa, shows, further, at moments, his advance in genuine dramatic power. Charles and Henrietta are more alive than other characters with whom Shelley was in closer sympathy,76 Shelley [CH. and whom he could make the mouthpiece of his own political animus and ideas. In April, the Pisan circle broke up, and Shelley, eager for the sea, settled, with Mary, and Edward and Jane Williams, in a lonely mansion, Casa Magni, on the wild Spezian bay. Several of the lyrics to Jane were written here, but his central preoccupation was the uncompleted Triumph of Life. Petrarch, in his Trionfi, had portrayed men subjugated by love, chastity, time. For Shelley, life itself, the 'painted veil' which obscures and disguises the immortal spirit, is a more universal conqueror, and, in vision, he sees this triumphal chariot pass, 'on the storm of its own rushing splendour,' over the captive multitude of men. Dante, rather than Petrarch, has inspired the conduct of the vision, where Rousseau, the darkened light whence a thousand beams had been kindled, interprets, like Vergil, to the rapt and questioning poet. Much of the symbolism is obscure, but the significant allusion to the Paradisothe rhyme Of him whom from the lowest depths of hell Through every Paradise and through all glory Love led serene, and who returned to tell In words of hate and awe-the wondrous story How all things are transfigured except Lovejustifies the surmise that love, which arms heroic spirits against the sway of life, was, in some way, to win the final triumph. The terza rima is very nobly handled, with a dominant fluidity which is more Petrarchian than Dantesque, but with moments of concentrated brevity which belong to the greater model. And the passionate outlook upon life which pervades and informs it marks Shelley's kinship. The sequel, doubtless, would have added clearness to a poem which remains one of the grandest, but by no means the least enigmatic, among the torsos of modern poetry. The Triumph of Life was the occupation of summer days spent afloat with Williams, on the Spezian bay. On 8 July, Shelley's boat was run down, it is said deliberately, in a sudden squall. His ashes, by the care of Trelawney, were buried in the protestant cemetery at Rome, side by side with those of the great brotherpoet whose requiem he had sung, and whose poetry had been his companion in the hour of death. A century has almost passed, and Shelley is still the subject of keener debate than any of his poetic contemporaries, not excepting Byron. That he is one of the greatest of lyric poets is eagerly allowed by his most hostile critics; the old grounds, too, of hostilityIII]

Summary

77

to him have, in the main, long since spent their malice, or count on his side; while some, which cannot be dismissed, are irrelevant to a final estimate of his poetry. But many who feel the spell of his 'lovely wail' are repelled by his 'want of substance'; Matthew Arnold's 'ineffectual angel' 'pinnacled dim in the intense inane' expresses, for them, the whole truth about the poet and about the man. And a part of the truth it undoubtedly does express. No stranger apparition ever visited that robust matter-of-fact Georgian England than this 'frail form,' of whom, at the outset, Hazlitt might have said with yet more truth than of Coleridge, that he 'had wings but wanted hands and feet.' Only, while Coleridge's wing 'flagged' more and more 'wearily' (as Shelley said), Shelley grew steadily, not only in power of flight, but in his living hold, both as poet and as man, upon certain orders of fact. His 'strangeness' was a part (not the whole) of his originality; and he paid its price. To most of what was complex, institutional, traditional in his milieu, he remained inaccessible, intransigent; he could not, like Wordsworth, find his 'home' in these things, still less find it a 'kindred-point' with his 'heaven.' For Shelley, society was rather the ground from which (like his Skylark) he soared to a heaven far remote; or, to use his yet more splendid image, the 'dome of many-coloured glass' beyond which he strove to project himself into a white radiance of eternity. As Bradley has aptly remarked, he forgot, not always but often, that the white radiance itself persists transformed in the many colours. That pure and intense aspiration, however, is the first note of Shelley's authentic poetry. It would not be authentic, it would hardly be memorable, if it merely expressed aspirations, however ideal and intense; but the expression itself is already creative and new. Shelley's mature verse and diction do not merely serve as a channel for his thought and feeling: the temper of his spirit penetrates and suffuses their very texture, evoking spontaneous felicities of rhythm and phrase, which are beautiful in their own right as well as by their subtle symbolism. Of all the poets of his time, Shelley's style carries us furthest from the closepacked, tessellated brilliance, the calculated point and precision, of the Augustans; to describe it we have to recur to images drawn from the undulating contours of waves, the pure intensity and splendour of flame. During the last years of his short life, his soaring idealism abated nothing of its ardour; but he found in the actual world of nature and of man more varied intimations of the 'Life of Life' they veiled, and his poetry, within its range, acquired a piercing and profound human truth without losing its unearthly78 SheIley [CH. III beauty. The most 'subjective' of modern English poets created our one great modern English tragedy. And the most 'romantic' of them had, almost alone, the secret of a truly 'classical' simplicity; a speech nobly bare, even austere, familiar without banality, poetic without artifice. Some kinds of poetic experience, and those not the least vital, he expresses with a delicate precision not less than that of the 'subtle soul'd psychologist' Coleridge; and he is sometimes most precise when he appears, to the ordinary reader, most 'vague.' And, while the philosophic beliefs of Coleridge hardly touch his poetry, and were deeply coloured by the interests of the theologian and the political theorist, the ultimate metaphysic of Shelley is the articulate interpretation of his most intense poetic vision, and vitally supplements, where it does not rudely traverse, the dogmas of his 'atheistic' or 'democratic' creed. To all readers, Shelley will remain the consummate inventor of lyric harmonies. To some, he will be not less precious for the glimpses given, in Adonais and in The Defence of Poetry, of a doctrine of universal being more consonant than any other with the nature of poetry.CHAPTER IV

KEATS JOHN KEATS was born on 29 or 31 October 1795, the eldest son of a livery-stable keeper in Finsbury Pavement, London. Sent, as a child of eight, to a school at Enfield, he attracted the interest and, before long, the devoted friendship, of the junior master, Charles Cowden Clark, to whom he owed his first initiation into poetry. About 1813, Clark read to the young surgeon's apprentice Spenser's Epithalamion, and put into his hands The Faerie Queene. In phrases as indispensable to the portrayer of Keats as those of Hogg to the biographer of Shelley, Clark tells us how he went thro' it as a young horse thro' a spring meadow ramping.... Like a true poet, too, he specially singled out epithets,... he hoisted himself up, and looked burly and dominant, as he said,' What an image that is, " seashouldring whales."' His earliest extant poem (1813) was an Imitation of Spenser. Yet, Spenser was to count for less in his poetry than other Elizabethans to whom Spenser led him-Fletcher, Browne and Chapman; and it was the arresting experience of 'first looking into Chapman's Homer' that prompted, early in 1815, his earliest outburst of great song. The writings of Leigh Hunt added an influence kindred, in some points, to these, and quickened, from the summer of 1816, by the spell of personal friendship. At Hunt's Hampstead cottage, Keats met Hazlitt, Haydon and Shelley. The former two won his deep admiration; Hazlitt's 'depth of taste' and Haydon's pictures he declared to be, with The Excursion, 'the three things to rejoice in in this age,' a dictum which, in each point, foreshadows a riper Keats than his poetry at this date betokens. His first volume of poems, issued in 1817, is still impressed, both for better and for worse, with the influence of Hunt. For better, since Keats could still learn much80

Keats

[CH.

from his Ariosto-like charm and ease, and especially from his revival of the flexible mode of the rimed couplet; for worse, since Hunt's faults of looseness and bad taste were, for Keats, still insidious and infectious. The volume marks the swiftness of his upward flight. Between the stanzas To some Ladies and I stood tiptoe or Sleep and Poetry, the distance is enormous, and Hunt's was the most powerful of the external forces which concurred with the most potent of all, his own ripening vision of beauty and truth. This vision of beauty, steadily growing richer as well as purer and more intense, inspires Sleep and Poetry, a noble prelude and forecast of his own future song. Still a young neophyte-'not yet a glorious denizen of the heaven of poesy'he derides, with boyish emphasis, the mechanic practitioners who 'wore its mark.' Keats was only renewing in fiery verse, when the battle was far advanced, the challenge with which, in his prose preface, Wordsworth had opened the affray. But Wordsworth had plainly helped him, also, to grasp the ideal task of the poet, and, thus, to formulate his own poetic aims. In Tintern Abbey, the older poet had looked back upon the ecstasies of his youthful passion for nature with a mind which had already reached a 'sublimer mood', responsive to the burden and mystery of the world. Keats finds in that retrospect the clue to his own forecast. He, too, will pass from the region of thoughtless joy-the realm of Flora and old Pan, where he chose each pleasure that his fancy saw-to 'the agonies, the strife of human hearts'; for this he already knows to be 'the nobler life.' But the parallel, though real, must not be too closely pressed. Keats was no disciple even of Wordsworth; he forged his own way, and his vision of beauty, even in its present immature stage, is far richer and more various than can be ascribed to the Wordsworth of 1793. Apart from his greater opulence of sensation, he draws a delight, which never counted for much with Wordsworth, from the imagination of others; beauty, for him, is not only 'a living presence of the earth'; the bright deities of Greeks and Elizabethans have their part in it, and Keats revels in airy touches which give us momentary glimpses of them. Is he indignant at the riot of foppery and barbarism? Apollo is indignant too; and to read the meaning of Jove's large eyebrow is no less a part of the poetic vision than to paint the tender green of April meadows. The caressing charm and joyance of manner, as well as the flowing rimed couplets, are still reminiscent only of Hunt, and, at the close, he turns from awed contemplation of the 'long perspective ofIV]

Endymion

8 I

the realms of poesy' before him to describe, with a full heart, the home of his good friend and mentor, and The hearty grasp that sends a pleasant sonnet Into the brain ere one can think upon it. The sonnet was, indeed, at this stage, Keats's most familiar mode of lyric expression. As early as 1814, he had stammered in this form his boyish worship of Byron and Chatterton. The seventeen sonnets published in the 1817 volume are mostly fresh utterances of admiring friendship. Haydon, his future sister-in-law Georgiana ('nymph of the downward smile and sidelong glance'), his brothers, or 'kind Hunt' are addressed or remembered in eminently 'pleasant,' but rarely accomplished, verse. They all follow the severe Petrarchian rime-form used by Wordsworth, andj often recall his more meditative sonnets both in phrase and sentiment. The little volume was discriminatingly reviewed by Hunt, but; made no impression. Keats, too acutely sensitive to his own critical judgment to care much for the world's, was already immersed in the great quest of beauty of which he had dreamed in Sleep and Poetry. Endymion, the work of the twelve months from April 1817 to April 1818, has the invertebrate structure, the insecure style, the weakness in narrative and the luxuriance of colour and music, natural to one who still lived more in sensation than in thought; but, also, the enchanted atmosphere and scenery, and the sudden reaches of vision, possible only to one whose senses were irradiated by imagination, and 'half created,' ' half perceived.' 'Poetry must surprise by a fine excess,' was a later dictum of Keats, justified by some of his finest work. At present, he spends his wealth wantonly, careless of the economies and reticences of great art. Yet, there are strokes of magic which no artistry could achieve, and many lines and phrases which help us to understand how, from the effeminate sentiment, was evolved the tender delicacy of The Eve of St Agnes, and, from the riot of luxurious fancy, the noble and ordered opulence of the Autumn ode. Of such is the wonderful picture of the wave Down whose green back the short-liv'd foam, all hoar, Bursts gradual, with a wayward indolence. The story of Endymion and the moon, as retold by the Elizabethans, had early captivated Keats's imagination: the loveliness of the moon-lit world-even in a London suburb-had E. L. XII. CH. IV. 6Keats

[CH.

become a kind of symbol for all beauty, and he himself a new Endymion, the implicit hero of the story he told; and, by the same symbolism, a lover of all loveliness, so that nothing in the universe of real or imagined beauty was irrelevant to his quest. Hence, we pass easily to and fio from this to other legends not otherwise akin-Cybele, Glaucus and Scylla, Arethusa. Neither his grip upon his subject nor his technical mastery yet avail to make these felt otherwise than as digressions. On the other hand, the Hymn to Pan (book i), and the roundelay of Bacchus (0 Sorrow) (book iv), where the dreamy pacing of the verse gathers into lyric concentration and intensity, mark the highest reach of the whole poem. In the brief, manly preface to Endymion-its sufficing comment-Keats told his critics that he recognised in it a feverish attempt rather than a deed accomplished.... It is just that this youngster should die away; a sad thought for me, if I had not some hope that while it is dwindling I may be plotting, and fitting myself for verses fit to live. In particular, he dreamed of trying once more to touch, 'before I bid it farewell,' the 'beautiful mythology of Greece.' Before Endymion was complete, he had planned with his friend Reynolds a volume of tales from Boccaccio. Keats chose the fifth story of the fourth day of The Decameron, that of Lisobeta and the pot of basil. It was, no doubt, an advantage for the author of Endymion to work upon a story which, with many openings for romantic and visionary imagination, was yet, in substance, close-knit and coherent. Its setting in the business world of an Italian city was less favourable to his art, and, throughout the first half of the tale, Keats is not completely at ease. But the romance owes to him almost all its delicate beauty. Boccaccio's lovers give some pretext to the brothers' violence; Isabel and Lorenzo are the innocent victims of a sordid crime, the memory of which comes back upon the perpetrators like the smoke of Hinnom. But it is after Lorenzo's murder that the poetic transformation of the romance is most complete. The apparition in Boccaccio is a conventional ghost-scene; Keats imagines the shadowy life of the murdered man in his forestgrave, slowly growing one with the earth and strange to mortal things, but quickened anew in the presence of Isabel. The great scene in the forest is told with an impassioned calm like that of Isabel herself, as she presses towards 'the kernel of the grave.' Boccaccio had evaded the ghostlier suggestions of the scene byIV] Letters 83 making the body miraculously intact. Keats does not evade them; but he ennobles what he will not conceal, and compels us to see not the wormy circumstance but 'Love impersonate, colddead indeed, but not dethroned.' Great as is the advance of Isabella upon Endymion, it must still be reckoned among his immature works, in view of the wonderful creations of the following autumn and spring. The six months which followed were a time of immensely rapid growth, not merely in imaginative power and technical mastery, but in intellectual range and vigour, and in moral grip. The not very precocious boy of eighteen and twenty is on the verge of the truly marvellous manhood of his twenty-fourth year, and the man, as well as the genius, is awake. His letters, after The Prelude the most precious document we possess of the growth of a poet's mind, are especially illuminating for the year 1818. 'To enjoy the things that others understand' might have satisfied his aspiration in 1817; in April 1818, he turns away dissatisfied from his own 'exquisite sense of the luxurious,' and feels the need of 'philosophy,' bracing experience and activity for his fellow-men. He will learn Greek and Italian, and in other ways prepare myself to ask Hazlitt in about a year's time the best metaphysical road I can take.... I find there is no worthy pursuit but the idea of doing some good in the world. In July, during a foot-tour with his friend Brown through the Highlands, he writes: I should not have consented to these four months' tramping,... but that I thought it would give me more experience, rub off more prejudice, use me to more hardship, identify finer scenes, load me with grander mountains, and strengthen more my reach in poetry than would stopping at home among my books. The germ of such thoughts can be found, it is true, in much earlier letters, and, as we have seen, in his first poetic profession of faith; for Keats was at no time the weakling suggested by much of his youthful verse. But they are pronounced with new conviction, they mark no fugitive aspiration, but a spiritual deliverance already, in effect, accomplished. He had, indeed, 'great allies'; Shakespeare and Wordsworth cooperated in deepening and enlarging the scope of his genius; to its richness they could not add. All through 1817, Shakespeare had been a companion; Endymion is strewn with his diction; in April 1818 (sonnet On sitting down to read King Lear once again), the golden harmonies of romance seemed thin and poor beside the 6-284

Keats

[CH.

passion and the heights and depths of Shakespearean tragedy. He was already past Endymion, and knew it, as his contemporary preface attests. And Wordsworth led him, by other, not less enthralling or less enduring, paths, to the same deeper understanding of sorrow. He was never weary, Brown tells us, of repeating the Immortality ode; its sublime portrayal of a mind redeemed by discipline and suffering and 'an eye that hath kept watch o'er man's mortality' perhaps contributed to the doctrine of the world as a 'Vale of Soul-making' through pain and trouble, which he unfolds in his beautiful letter of April 1819 to his brother George. And Wordsworth helped to draw him nearer to one whose poetry provided a yet sterner discipline for the effeminate elements of his genius. In Milton, he recognised a poet who 'with an exquisite passion for poetic luxury, had yet preferred the ardours to the pleasures of song.' It was under these conditions and in this temper that he prepared to carry out the intention expressed in the preface to Endymion. Six months after the completion of Endymion, Hyperion was begun. It was a giant step forward, which neither the intimate study of Milton nor his first experience, on the Highland tour, of grand scenery, of mountain glory and gloom, or of the relics of fallen faiths (like the druid cirque at Keswick), makes less wonderful. In the story of Hyperion, he found a theme equal in its capacity for epic grandeur to that of Paradise Lost, and, with apparent ease, he rose to its demands, as if Milton had merely liberated a native instinct of greatness from the lure of inferior poetic modes. Endymion was a tissue of adventures, the romantic history of a soul; in Hyperion, we watch a conflict of world-powers, the passing of an old order and the coming of a new, the ruin and triumph of gods. The indecisive dreamy composition gives place to a noble architectonic. Keats was not at all points at a disadvantage in his bold rivalry with Milton. If he could not bring the undefinable weight of experience, of prolonged and passionate participation in great and memorable events, which is impressed on every line of Paradise Lost, his austerest restraint is touched with the freshness and entrain of young genius. If he has less than Milton's energy, he has more than his magic; if he has less of dramatic passion and movement, he has more of sculpturesque repose. It is here, however, that the doubt arises whether the magnificent torso could have been completed on an epic scale. Milton's theology introduced a conflict of purpose into his epic which isIV]

Hyperion

85

never overcome; but it secured to the vanquished fiends a cause and a triumph; they move us by their heroic resolve as well as by their suffering. Keats's 'theology' was the faith proper to a devotee of the principle of beauty in all things, 'that first in beauty shall be first in might'; but this law, recognised and proclaimed by the defeated Titans themselves, makes any enterprise like Satan's not merely unnecessary to the scheme of things, but in flagrant contradiction with it. The ruined Titans are inferior not only in nobility, but in strength and spirit. The pathos of a hopelessly and finally lost cause broods from the first over the scene; the contrast between the passionate recovery of the still mighty archangel from his fall, and the slow, sad awakening of aged Saturn, is typical. Satan's defiance is more poetic and so, in the deeper sense, more beautiful, than the sad resignation of Adam and Eve; but, in Keats, it is sorrow, not hate, that is 'more beautiful than beauty's self.' Hyperion, incomplete, perhaps inevitably incomplete, as it is, remains the greatest achievement of Keats in poetry. Yet, its want of root in his intimate experience compels us to class it among the sublime tours de force, not among the supreme poems, of the world. And the effort to be Miltonic, even in his own way, finally grew oppressive. If Milton liberated, he also constrained, and Keats, in the later parts of the fragment, is often himself in a way that is un-Miltonic. After the close of 1818, Hyperion was only fitfully pursued; in September 1819, he writes that he has definitively given it up. Two months later, however, he had new plans with it. During November and December, he was 'deeply engaged,' records Brown, 'in remodelling the fragment of Hyperion into the form of a vision.' Though The Fall of Hyperion betrays the impending failure of his powers, it is of surpassing interest as an index to the ways of his mind. There is little doubt that, from Milton, he had passed, during 1819, to a renewed study of Dante (in Cary's translation). In the pregnant symbolism of The Divine Comedy, he found a mode of expressing ideas more akin to his own than Milton's austere grandeur. Dante's gradual purification, also, in Purgatory, by pain, answered to his own youthful conception (in Sleep and Poetry) of a progress, through successive illusions, towards the true state of the poet. And, as Dante has to climb the mountain and pass through the fire before he can receive the vision of Beatrice, so Keats represents himself as passing successively through the indolent romance of the dreamer, the 'garden' and the 'temple,'86

Keats

[CH.

up to the 'shrine' where the poet, taught, at length, to grapple directly with experience, endures the fiery proof of those to whom the miseries of the world Are miseries, and will not let them rest. Only thus may he receive the vision of the meaning of beauty disclosed in the story of Hyperion, now, at length, retold. Moneta, the Beatrice of this vision, is, however, no radiant daughter of heaven, but a 'forlorn divinity,' the 'pale Omega of a wither'd race,' though, also, as the fostress of Apollo, the 'Alpha' of a new. Thus, insistently, did Keats, with symbol and image, press home the thought that beauty, the ideal, can only be won through pain, and that poetry is incomplete if it evade and leave unexpressed 'the agonies, the strife of human hearts.' Though The Fall does not approach Hyperion in sustained splendour, and diverges from it in the passages common to both, mostly for the worse, yet, it contains some lines which he never surpassed; and his attempt to charge the myth with a richer and deeper import, unskilful as it was, justifies the surmise that, had his powers not failed, he might have given to England a poem more nearly comparable than any other with Goethe's Faust. In the meantime, however, a rich harvest of poetry had been gathered in. The Eve of St Agnes, begun at Chichester, January 1819, throws some light on the causes which had gradually detached his interest from Hyperion. For it betrays an almost conscious revulsion from the austere grandeur, the cosmic scenery and the high prophetic theme of Milton. It is, in the loftiest sense of the words, a young man's poem, pervaded by the glow, the romance, the spiritual and sensuous exaltation of youth. Chatterton and Spenser here take Milton's place with Keats, and both are more nearly of his kin. A few lines of Burton's Anatomy, describing the legend, were, probably, the sole nucleus of this magical creation. The romance of Madeline and Porphyro, unlike that of Isabella and Lorenzo, shone out to his imagination against the background of harshly alien forces. But, everything that there made for drama and conflict is here subdued, almost effaced, while everything of purely beautiful and harmonious appeal, whether to soul or sense, is enriched and heightened. The menace of murderous kinsmen is now merely the distant clamour of gross revelry heard fitfully through an opening door. The 'bitter chill' of the winter landscape, the snow and storm without, though drawn with an intensity of imagination hardly matched in winter-painting elsewhere, merelyIV]

The Eve of St Agnes

87

encompass with their aridity and torpor, but cannot invade or impair, the glow and warmth of fragrance and gracious soul-light of Madeline's chamber. Everything here-from the tender glories of the painted window to the delicate cates of the banquet-is imagined with a consummate instinct for beauty which explores and exhausts all the sources of sensuous appeal, yet so transfigures them that nothing merely sensuous is left. The stanza-handled with a mastery equalled, save in The Faerie Queene, only il Adonais, where it is much less Spenserian-shows, with certain archaisms, that Spenser was in his mind. But, Porphyro and Madeline are of a more breathing and human world than Spenser's; their passion and their purity, the high chivalry, the awed rapture of the scene, are untouched by allegory; and, if Madeline, with the exquisite naivetd of her maiden love, has any lineage, it is not to be found in a Britomart or Una, radiant champions and symbols of chastity, but in an Imogen or a Perdita. What remains of the companion piece, The Eve of St Mark's, though conceived at the same time, was written some months later, and it remained unfinished. Once more, a saint's day legend sets astir the devout heart of a young girl. But the pictorial artistry, even more exquisite, is in the subtler, more reticent, manner of Christabel. 'It is quite in the spirit of town quietude,' wrote Keats. An old minster, 'on a coolish evening,' echoing footfall, drowsy chimes and Bertha's chamber in the gloaming with the play of her flickering shadow upon screen and panel-subdued effects like these replace the 'bitter cold,' the gules and argent of St Agnes. And there are hints of a delicate grotesquerie equally foreign to that poem, but, like its delicate finished realism, its miniature description, foreshadowing Rossetti, who regarded it as, together with LaBelleDame, 'in manner the choicest and chastest of Keats's work.' The other, not less wonderful, romance of this spring, La Belle Dame sans Merci (April 1819), may, also, be called a companion poem of The Eve ofSt Agnes; but the ways of Keats's genius are here seen in a totally different, almost opposite, aspect. The woeful knight at arms, like Madeline, has awakened from a dream; but his awakening is poignant disillusion, not blissful fulfilment; the desolate moor, not the fragrant chamber and the lover's presence. And his weird chant is in subtlest sympathy with his forlornness. Instead of the jewelled richness, the saturated colour of The Eve of St Agnes, we have a style of horror-stricken reticence and suggestion, from which colour and definite form have been withdrawn; and a music of brief haunting cadences, not of eloquent,88 Keats [CH. articulated phrase. The character of each poem is accentuated in the final line of its stanza: the Alexandrines of The Eve of St Agnes are points of heightened entrain, the short slow closing verses of La Belle Dame ('And no birds sing'), moments of keener suspense. Lamina, last of the tales in verse, followed after an interval of some months and under widely different intellectual conditions. The summer of 1819 found Keats adventuring in regions more than ever remote from the dream-world of Endymion. Shakespeare draws him to the historic drama; to these months belong his experiments, Otto the Great and Stephen; a little later came The Cap and Bells. And now it was the supple and sinewy narrative, the sensuous splendour, the ringing, metallic rimes of Dryden's verse-tales that attracted his emulation. The story of Lamia (June-September) which he found in Burton resembled those of Isabella and of The Eve of St Agnes in representing two lovers united by a secret and mysterious bond; but, here, the mystery becomes sheer witchcraft. The witch-maiden Lamia, in the hands of the author of La Belle Dame, might well have yielded a counterpart of Coleridge's Geraldine. The influence of Dryden's robust and positive genius has almost banished the delicate reticences of the earlier poems. Lamnia's transformations have the hard brilliance of mosaics; the 'volcanian yellow' invades her silver mail 'as the lava ravishes the mead.' The same influence told more happily in the brilliant precision of the picture of the city festival, each half-line a distinct and living vignette. There are not wanting-there could not betouches of descriptive magic, but the charm of Lamia is rather described than felt; whether woman be her true nature (I 118) or her disguise (ii 306) (and this is not made clear), she has not the defined character of either; as a psychological portrait, she cannot stand beside Isabel or Madeline. And the cynical tone of restoration gallantry has, here and there, betrayed Keats into lapses of taste elsewhere overcome, as in the terrible line i 330 ('there is not such a treat among them all....As a real woman'), and the opening of part I. Keats felt intensely the contrast between the romance of passion and the outer world of cold reflection. In The Eve of St Agnes, the flame-like glow of light colour which surrounds the lovers is symbolically contrasted with the frozen world without. In Lamia, this symbolism is less telling. But it is helped out by an explicit comment on the climax of the story. The sophist's eye transfixes the serpent-lady, and dissolves the pageant of her love. So, 'cold philosophy'IV]

Odes

89

destroys romance. The 'moral' expressed an antagonism dear to Keats's passionately intuitive mind; but its introduction implied just such an obtrusion of reflection upon poetry as it purported to condemn. It is easy, in tracing the growth of an artist who studied so intently the genius of others, to lay too much stress on his artistic seriousness. His famous counsel to Shelley, too, might suggest that he himself was, above all, a curious and elaborate artificer. Some of his manuscripts, no doubt, support this impression. Yet, Keats was not only extraordinarily spontaneous: he could play lightly with the passing mood. His quick sensitiveness of eye and ear and fancy tempted him along many poetic byways beside the way he deliberately chose He did not write only in his singing-robes, but delighted to weave pleasant rimes in familiar undress. The brother and sister-in-law in America, and his friend Reynolds, received many such rimed interludes in his letters-lively fountains of verse springing up unbidden in the garden of his prose. Such are the four poems, Robin Hood, Lines on the Mermaid Tavern, Fancy and The Bards of Passion and of Mirth, all written in the short couplet of L'Allegro, with a delicacy of music of which Milton had helped him to the secret, and a daintiness and playfulness of fancy akin to Beaumont and Fletcher, and other haunters of the Mermaid, bards of 'mirth' even more than of 'passion.' It is natural to contrast with these light and sparkling improvisations the rich and concentrated style-' loaded with gold in every rift'-and the intricate interwoven harmonies of the majority of the contemporary odes. But, most of these were impromptus, too, born of the same sudden inspiration, and their crowded felicities were not studiously inlaid, but of the vital essence of the speech. A may morning, an autumn afternoon, a nightingale's song in a Hampstead garden, a mood of dreamy relaxation after sleepfrom intense, almost momentary, experiences like these sprang poems which, beyond anything else in Keats, touch a universal note. In the earliest of these, the fragmentary Ode to Maia (May 1818), the recent singer of Endymion breathes yet another lyric prayer to the old divinities of antique Greece, seeking the ' old vigour' of its bards, and, yet more, their noble simplicity, 'content' to make 'great verse' for few hearers. The author of the preface to Endymion already possessed that temper; and, if he ever won the pellucid purity of Greek speech, it was in these lines. The other odes belonged to the spring of 1819, save Autumn, the latest, written in September. Psyche, almost the last of the90

Keats

[CHI.

group, was, he tells his brother George, 'the first and only one with which I have taken even moderate pains.' Yet this, like Indolence, falls somewhat short of the flawless art of the rest. In both, he is, at moments, luxuriant and unstrung like his earlier self. Psyche, 'loveliest vision far' of faded Olympus, becomes now, like Maia, a living symbol of the beauty he worships, and he will be the priest of her sanctuary. The Miltonic reminiscences are palpable, and by no means confined to an incidental phrase or image. The passing of the gods of Greece, moving, in spite of himself, to the poet of the Nativity Ode, Keats mourned more naively than Schiller had done twenty years before; then, by a beautiful, perhaps 'illogical,' transition, lament passes into a rapturous hymn to the deathless Psyche whose living temple was the poet's mind. Indolence commemorates a mood, as genuine, indeed, but less nearly allied to the creative springs of Keats's genius. Love and ambition and poetry itself appear as ghostly or masque-like figures on a 'dreamy urn'; for them he builds no sanctuary, but turns away from their lure to the honied joys of sense-the sweetness of 'drowsy noons,' his 'head cool-bedded in the flowery grass.' In the nearly contemporary Ode on a Grecian Urn, the symbolism of the urn-figures became far more vital. From the drowsed intoxication of the senses, he rises to a glorious clear-eyed apprehension of the spiritual eternity which art, with its 'unheard melodies,' affords. The three consummate central stanzas have themselves the impassioned serenity of great sculpture. Only less noble are the daring and splendid imagery of the opening, and the immortal paradox of the close. 'Their lips touched not, but had not bade adieu,' Keats later said of the sleeping lovers in Psyche, recalling, perhaps, with the carved figures of the Grecian Urn, the wistful joy of Melancholy. In both these great odes, however, the words imply a more spiritual and complex passion than the naive bliss of Psyche and Cupid. They meant a stranger and rarer insight into the springs of both joy and sorrow than was thus conveyed. The worship of beauty is the clue to everything in Keats; and, as he came to feel that an experience into which no sadness enters belongs to an inferior order of beauty, so lie found the most soul-searching sorrow 'in the very Temple of Delight.' But the emotional poise is other than in the Grecian Urn: there, he contemplates the passing of 'breathing human beauty' from the serene heights of eternal art; here, it fills him with a poignant, yet subtly Epicurean, sadness. Melancholy is thus nearer to the mood of Indolence, and, like it, suffers from some resurgence ofIV]

Sonnets

91

the earlier Keats; but the closing lines are of consummate quality. In the Ode to a Nightingale, the work of a morning in his friend Brown's Hampstead garden, the poignant sense of life as it is, 'where Beauty cannot keep her lustrous eyes,' and the reaching out to a visionary refuge-the enchanted world created by the bird's song-are present together, but with changing dominance, the mood's ecstatic self-abandonment being shattered, at its very acme, by the knell-like 'forlorn,' which 'tolls' him back to his 'sole self.' In Autumn, finally, written after an interval of some months, the sense that beauty, though not without some glorious compensation, perishes, which, in varying degrees, dominates these three odes, yields to a serene and joyous contemplation of beauty itself. The 'season of mellow fruitfulness' wakens no romantic vision, no romantic longing, like the nightingale's song; it satisfies all senses, but enthralls and intoxicates none; everything breathes contented fulfilment without satiety, and beauty, too, is fulfilled and complete. Shelley, whose yet greater ode was written a few weeks later, gloried in the 'breath of autumn's being'-the wild west wind as the forerunner and 'creator' of spring. Keats feels here no need either of prophecy or of retrospect. If, for a moment, he asks 'Where are the songs of spring?' it is only to reply 'Think not of them, thou hast thy music too.' This is the secret of his strength, if, also, of his limitation-to be able to take the beauty of the present moment so completely into his heart that it seems an eternal possession. With one exception, the Autumn ode is the last great and complete poem of Keats. The last of all, written a year later, is, with Milton's Methought I saw, among the most moving of English sonnets. Of the sixty-one sonnets he wrote, more than thirty are later than those in the 1817 volume, already noticed, and nearly all belong to the fifteen months following January 1818. He had written no sonnet during the last eight months of 1817. But his close and eager study of Shakespeare's poems towards the end of that year sent him back with renewed zest to sonnet-writing, and, henceforth, after an interval of hesitation, it was exclusively on the Shakespearean rime-scheme. The sonnet which shows him most decisively under the spell of Shakespeare (On sitting down to read King Lear once again, January 1818) still, it is true, follows (save for the final couplet) the Petrarchian form. But, a few days later, he wrote the noble When I have fears, with the beautiful repetition of the opening phrase in each92

Keats

[cH.

quatrain, reminiscent of Shakespearean sonnets, such as In me thou see'st. One or two, as the charming June's sea, copy the Elizabethan manner too cleverly to be very like Keats, nor are his mind and passion at all fully engaged. But, often, he pours into the Shakespearean mould a phrase and music nobly his own. To Homer ('Standing aloof') contains the line 'There is a budding morrow in midnight' which Rossetti pronounced the noblest in English poetry. To Sleep is full of the poppied enchantment of the Nightingale ode. A new, and tragic, note sounds in The Day is gone, I cry you mercy-with one or two exceptions (Ode to Fanny and To...) the only reflection in his poetry of the long agony of his passion for Fanny Brawne. Finally, after a long interval, came that September day of 1820 when, 'for a moment,' writes Severn, 'he became like his former self,' and wrote his last sonnet and last verse Bright star! He still aspires, as in the great odes, towards something steadfast and unchangeable; but now, when he is at the end of his career, and aware that it is the end, the breathing human passion counts more for him than the lone splendour of the star. Save for this sonnet, the year 1820 was a blank. Even before the seizure of 3 February, his poetic power had declined, though still capable of glorious flashes such as redeem the revised Hyperion. With the publication of his last volume, in July, some perception of his real stature at length dawned in the high places of criticism. Jeffrey, in The Edinburgh, did not conceal his admiration; Byron admitted that, in Hyperion, the surgeon's apprentice had really 'done something great'; Shelley, strangely indifferent to the rest of the volume, declared that, if Hyperion were not grand poetry, none had been written in his time. Neither Shelley nor Keats completely understood each other; but the younger poet here fell short, both in critical discernment and in modesty, of the elder; his chief recorded utterance about Shelley, and addressed to him, expresses only the annoyance of a lover of fine phrases at the 'magnanimity' of the idealist which stood in their way. Of the fact that Shelley's mind, with some limitations from which he was exempt, had a far larger reach than his own, he nowhere betrays any perception. To Shelley's cordial overtures of friendship, he had, throughout, responded with reserve; and an invitation now received from him (August 1820), to spend the winter with him in Italy, was declined. Even such companionship could not be faced by a dying man. A month later, Keats set out for Rome in care of the devoted Severn, who, during thisIV]

Summary

93

last brief, sad phase of the poet's life, takes the place of the no less devoted Brown. There, after a relapse from which he never recovered, he died on 23 February 1821. Four days later, he was buried in the protestant cemetery. In April, the selfeffacing epitaph which described him as 'one who had writ in water' was magnificently belied by Adonais. 'I am certain of nothing,' Keats once wrote, 'but the holiness of the heart's affections and the Truth of Imagination.' Neither Wordsworth nor Shelley put so trenchantly the faith that was implicit in the poetry of both. Nor would either have asserted with the same daring simplicity that he had 'pursued the principle of Beauty in all things.' Abstractions distinguishable from beautynature, liberty, love-and truths with which imagination had little to do, counted for as much, or more, with both; and beauty itself is with neither of them so comprehensive, with neither so near and intimate, as it is with Keats. Shelley's worship is remote and 'intellectual,' at once too abstract and too simple to take in much of the concrete and complex actual world. It was the 'Life of Life,' and his gaze pressed home to it through the shimmering veil of the material beauty by which other men's senses were arrested and detained. It was a harmony, perfectly realised only in a world completely at one with itself. The complexities and conflicts of life, and its resulting pain and sorrow, thus remained, for him, purely evil things, of inferior status, even in poetry. Keats could not compare with Shelley in range of ideas, but neither was he weighted with Shelley's speculative incubus; if his thought was not illuminated by Plato, neither was it distorted by Godwin; if he had not access to the sublimities of Aeschylus, he was steeped in the rich humanity of Shakespeare and Spenser and Browne and Wordsworth. His whole imaginative and emotional life was permeated by his eager and acute sensations; while his senses-it is but the other side of the same fact-were transfigured by imagination and emotion. He projected himself instinctively and eagerly into the nature of other living things, not merely some 'immortal' nightingale whose song set wide the magic casements of romance in his heart, but the mere sparrow picking about the gravel before his window. He was no subtle-souled psychologist like Coleridge, but he rendered emotions with a power and richness in which exquisiteness of feeling and poignancy of sensuous symbolism have equal part. Shelley's explanation of his unlettered mastery of the myths of Greece-'He was a Greek'was more generous than apt; he was nearer akin to the Elizabethans,94 Keats [CH. IV nearer to Wordsworth, nearer even to Shelley himself; but he recovered more completely than any of them the intense humanising vision of nature of which primeval myth was born. And he won his way from the 'Asiatic' luxury of his first work to a power of striking home by the fewest and most familiar words, as in La Belle Dame, which, utterly un-Greek in atmosphere and spirit, has the magical simplicity of some lyrics of the Anthology. He did not learn to express beauty so comprehensively as he perceived and understood it; probably, he would never have approached in drama the full compass of the beauty which lies, he knew, in the agonies and strife of life-the beauty of the fierce dispute Between damnation and impassion'd clay in King Lear or Macbeth. But, in the imaginative intensity of single phrases, no English poet has come nearer to Shakespeare or oftener recalls him. And, in Hyperion, he showed himself master, not only of a poetic speech for which no theme was too noble or too great, but of a power of construction by no means to be explained by the great example he had before him. It would be rash to say what in poetry would have been beyond the reach of one who, at twentyfive, compels the comparison with Shakespeare and Milton, and yet, deeply as he came under their spell, was lifted by their genius only into more complete possession of his own.CHAPTER V

LESSER POETS, 1790-1837 ROGERS, CAMPBELL, MOORE AND OTHERS IN two wellknown lines of the dedication of Don Juan, Byron, pursuing his quarrel with the lake poets, or, rather, with Southey, but grouping the three in a common disparagement, laid it down that Scott, Rogers, Campbell, Moore, and Crabbe will try 'Gainst you the question with posterity. It is needless to say that posterity has decided that question, group for group, in a sense opposite to the noble poet's real or apparent anticipation. Southey, indeed, may have been 'knocked out' of the competition, on the one side, in the general opinion, and Scott and Crabbe, on the other, may hold their ground, though with considerably fewer points to their credit than Wordsworth and Coleridge. But something like critical unanimity or, at least, a vast majority of critical votes, would disallow, despite admitted merits, the possibility of Rogers, Campbell and Moore continuing the fight on anything like even terms. Still, the grouping remains; and, as Scott falls out of any possible treatment in such a chapter as this and Crabbe has received his measure already, the remaining poets of Byron's fancy may properly occupy us first, to be followed by a large and, in few cases, quite uninteresting or undistinguished train of poets, sometimes of rare excellence in special lines, but, now for this reason now for that, not classable or, at any rate, not generally classed, among the greater singers. The whole body will represent, in some cases with a little overflow, the time before the appearance of distinctly Victorian poets-the time, for the most part, anterior to that most noteworthy 'Lament for Dead Makers' which Wordsworth, less happily than Dunbar, called An Extempore Effusion on the Death of James Hogg, which mentions96

Lesser Poets, 790 -1837

[CH.

other and greater writers than the Ettrick shepherd, and which actually marks an important dividing line between the dead and the living poets of the earlier nineteenth century, when a full third of that century had passed. The 'knock-out' above suggested in Southey's case might or might not really have surprised Byron; for it is clear that it was Southey's principles and personality, rather than his poetry, that annoyed his assailant. But he might have been much more certainly disappointed at the corresponding drop in the public estimation of Rogers. At the present time, it is probably a very exceptional thing to find anyone who, save in a vague traditional way, thinks of the author of The Pleasures of Memory as a poet at all; and, even where that tradition survives, it is extremely questionable whether it is often supported by actual reading. At one time, of course, Rogers was quite a popular poet; and it is a task neither difficult nor disagreeable for the literary historian to trace the causes of his popularity. He had, like Campbell, the very great advantage of beginning at a dead season and, again like Campbell, he had the further, but more dangerous, advantage of writing in a style which, while thoroughly acceptable to established and conventional criticism, had certain attractions for the tastes, as yet undeveloped, which were to bring about new things. He kept this up later, with some deliberate heed to younger tastes, in Italy and Jacqueline, thus shifting, but still retaining, his grasp. His wealth left him free to write or not, exactly as he pleased: and, in the famous case of Italy itself, to reinforce his work in a manner which appealed to more tastes than the purely literary by splendid presentation with the aid of great pictorial art. If he had a sharp tongue, and, perhaps, not exactly a kind heart, he had a very generous disposition; and he was most powerfully assisted by the undefinable gift, by no means a necessary consequence of his affluence, which enabled a parvenu to become something like a master of society. He really had taste of various kinds: he might have been a greater poet if he had had less. And so he hit the bird of public taste on several of its many wings. But the greater number, if not the whole, of these attractions have now ceased to attract; like the plates of Italy itself, they have generally become 'foxed' with time. We ask, nowadays, simply, 'Was Rogers a poet?' and, if so, 'What sort of a poet was he?' There cannot, for reasons above glanced at, be many people whose answer to this question would be worth much, unless it is based on a dispassionate re-reading of the documents in the case. Suchv]

Rogers

97

a re-reading may, to some extent, qualify earlier and more impulsive judgments of the same critic; but it is not likely, whatever power of correcting his impressions that critic may possess, to produce any very material alteration of opinion. For Rogers, very distinctly and unmistakably, comes on one side of the dividing line which marks off sheep from goats in this matter; though, on which side the goats are to be found and on which the sheep will depend entirely on the general and foregone attitude of the investigator of poetry. Rogers's subjects are good; his treatment of them is scholarly, and never offends against the ordinary canons of good taste; his versification is smooth and pleasing on its own limited scale; from some points of view, he might be pronounced an almost faultless writer. But will all this make him a poet? If it will not, we might, perhaps, explain the failure worse than by applying to him that opposition of 'quotidian' and 'stimulant' which his very near contemporary William Taylor of Norwich devised as a criterion; which Carlyle laughed at; which Taylor himself made somewhat ridiculous in application; but which has something to say for itself, and which will not be found quite useless in regard to many, if not most, of the subjects of this chapter. Rogers is always quotidian. You may read The Pleasures of Memory at different times of life (and the more different these periods and the longer the intervals the better). It is not difficult or unpleasant to read; and though, if not at first, certainly a little later, you may feel pretty sure that, if Akenside, on the one hand, and Goldsmith, on the other, had not written, The Pleasures of Memory might never have been, this is far from fatal. The question is 'What has it positively to give you?' Here is one of its very best couplets: Ethereal Power! who at the noon of night Recallst the far-fled spirit of delight. That is good; 'far-fled spirit of delight' is good. But is it, to borrow once more La Rochefoucauld's injurious comparison, 'delicious'? Is it even satisfying? Could you not very well do without it? Now, the phrases of a real poet, though there are, fortunately, thousands and myriads of them, are always delicious; they are always satisfying; and no one of them will enable you to do without any of the others. Let us try another text and test. The duke of Wellington (as Rogers himself most frankly records in a note to the poem) had told Rogers, with his usual plainness of speech and absence

E. L. XII. CH. V.

798

Lesser Poets, I790- 837

[CH.

of pose, a striking story, how, when he went to sleep after the great slaughter of Assaye, whenever I woke, which I did continually through the night, it struck me that I had lost all my friends: nor could I think otherwise till morning came and, one by one, I saw those that were living. We know vaguely what mighty use the poets, the real poets, from Shakespeare (one might even say from Chaucer) to Shelley would have made of this. If the comparison with these be thought unfair, we can guess from isolated touches in poems like Lochiel and Lord Ullin's Daughter what a contemporary, a companion in Byron's group and, as we may say, a 'schoolfellow' like Campbell could have made of it. This is the commonplace and conventional generality which it suggested to Rogers: Where many an anxious, many a mournful thought, Troubling, perplexing, on his heart and mind Preyed, ere to arms the morning trumpet called. With equal frankness (it would be unkind to call it insensibility), he wrote Italy partly in verse partly in prose; and there must have been some, perhaps many, to whom the illiberal but critical thought must have suggested itself 'Why not all in prose?' The somewhat famous story of Ginevra would have lost little; and, perhaps, only one piece, and that the best of all, 'The Campagna of Rome,' might be saved, in almost its own figure, by the lines Once again We look; and lo! the sea is white with sails Innumerable, wafting to the shore Treasures untold; the vale, the promontories A dream of glory; temples, palaces, Called up as by enchantment; aqueducts Among the groves and glades, rolling along Rivers on many an arch high overheadAnd in the centre, like a burning sun The Imperial City. Let us leave Rogers with that line and a half and with only a historical, not a spiteful, reference to Paradise Regained; for hardly anywhere else, in short poem or in long, has he come so near the 'poetic moment,' even if he has come near, also, to Milton in more senses than one. Not thus ungraciously can any critic speak of Campbell; but, anyone who spoke of him with unmixed graciousness would hardly be a critic. To him, the 'moment' just mentioned was no stranger;V]

Campbell

99

they met, and he made almost or quite the best of it, again and again. He has the glorious distinction of being, in three different pieces, nearer than any other poet among many to being a perfect master of the great note of battle-poetry. Of these, one, Ye Mariners of England, is, to some extent, an adaptation, though an immense improvement on its original; and The Battle of the Baltic has some singular spots on its sun. But Hohenlinden is unique; subject and spirit, words and music make an indivisible quaternity and, except in two or three passages of Homer and Aeschylus, there is nothing anywhere that surpasses the last and culminating stanza in poignant simplicity. Perhaps no other poem of Campbell can be named with these three, as a whole, but most of his earlier and shorter poems give flashes of undoubted poetry. There is no space here for a miniature anthology of these blooms; but some of them are universally known, and no one with an eye and ear for poetry can read, without recognising it in them, Lochiel's Warning, Lord Ullin's Daughter (the central jewel of this, however hackneyed, must be excepted for quotation, And in the scowl of Heaven each face Grew dark as they were speaking), the less known, but, in parts, extremely beautiful Lines on Revisiting a Scene in Argyllshire, The Soldier's Dream, The Last Man and others. All these are of a tragic and, if not romantic, romantesque cast; but Campbell has retained not a little of the eighteenth century epigram in such lines as the other stock quotation The torrent's smoothness ere it dash below. He had a bluff felicity, as in The Song of Hybrias the Cretan, which is not too common at any time; and, in other songs, such as Withdraw not yet those lips and fingers, or How delicious is the winning, there are strange reminiscences of that seventeenth century feeling to which he sometimes did justice in his critical Specimens and which greater singers have not been able to command in their actual verse. So far so good; but, unfortunately, no historical account of Campbell's poetry can be arrested at this point. He did not write much verse in his fairly long life; not because he was prevented by untoward circumstances (for, though he had some hackwork to do, it was never oppressive or prohibitory), but, apparently, because he did not feel inclined to write much. But, at a rough guess, he 7-2100 Lesser Poets, I790- 1837 [CH. wrote some six or seven thousand lines in all, and it is certain that the poems referred to above, even taking the bad or indifferent (which, in some, is the much larger) part with the good, do not amount to anything like six or seven hundred. The long, or comparatively long, Pleasures of Hope, which at once made his fame and his fortune, is much better (though Byron did not think so) than its companion and predecessor Memory, for, as has been said, Campbell was a poet and Rogers, save by chance-medley, was not. But, with less flatness, it has nearly as much artificiality; it scarcely ever gets beyond metred rhetoric; and this rhetoric itself, as in the tag And Freedom shrieked when Kosciusko fell, is not always firstrate. Freedom, whether she sits crowned upon the heights or, for the time, dies fighting on the field, has something else to do than to shriek. Of the other long poems, Gertrude of Wyoming, perhaps, is the clumsiest caricature of the Spenserian stanza ever achieved by a man of real poetic power; the comparison with Thomson which has sometimes been made of it is an insult to The Castle of Indolence; and it is even far below Beattie. As for Theodoric and The Pilgrim of Glencoe, they have, from the first, been carefully 'confessed and avoided' by Campbell's warmest admirers when these had any taste at all. But, it may be said, this long-poem practice was not his vein. The accidents of time and other things had, in the dead season of 1799, made The Pleasures of Hope a success, and he had to try to repeat it. But he did not by any means confine himself to these long poems; and it will have been noticed that, even in reference to the shorter ones and the best of them, it was necessary to speak in all but one instance with reservations. In his Specimens, Campbell showed himself, though rather a limited, not a bad, critic, and, though his dislike1 to the prevailing romantic school (which yet he followed in a sidelong and recalcitrant manner) made him take a questionable part in the Bowles-Pope controversy, he was not contemptible there. But, of self-criticism-at least of such selfcriticism as prevents a man from publishing inferior work-he seems to have had little or nothing. It would be dangerous to take his asserted confession, at one moment, that The Pleasures of Hope was 'trash,' as a serious utterance; besides, it is not exactly 1 It has been urged that, in 1842, he acknowledged the greatness of Wordsworth. "Tis somewhat late,' as the voice said in Christmas Eve and Easter Day, but, no doubt, better than never.v]

CampbeZl

IOI

that. Yet, he could deliberately publish, as a version of a chorus in Medea, the following lines: Hallowed Earth! with indignation Mark! oh mark! the murderous deedRadiant eye of wide creation Watch the accursed infanticide[ceed]. In the vales of placid gladness Let no rueful maniac range; Chase afar the fiend of madness, Wrench the dagger from Revenge[vange]. Which looks like an attempt to match Pope's Song by a Person of Quality in the serious blood-and-thunder vein. Nor, if he is seldom quite so bad as this, does he avoid, in a very large number of cases, coming only too near to it. Cases of 'the poet dying young' (all Campbell's best work was done when he was a little past thirty) and the man surviving are, of course, common enough; and, in most of them, there is little or no need to seek for a special and philosophical explanation. In Campbell's, we may, perhaps, find a particular one beyond the undoubted and obvious fact that the springs of his Helicon were neither frequent nor full; and that it required a special stamp of one breed of Pegasus to set them flowing. He probably suffered not a little from being, in a rather peculiar manner, recalcitrant to his time. He was younger than Wordsworth, Coleridge, Scott and Southey, and, though he did not live to be a very old man, Tennyson's Poems of 1842 and Browning's Bells and Pomegranates, 1841, were published before his death. But he withstood the romantic grace, and yet he could not thoroughly rest and be content with the older classical dispensation. It has been said that Collins would probably have benefited unequivocally by the chance of writing at the time when Campbell actually did write. It is not too great a compliment to the author of Hohenlinden to say that there are not a few touches in him which remind us of Collins. But, if he did not exactly, in the language of his own country, 'sin the mercies' that Collins did not receive, he made little use of them. And so he remains an interesting example, both in himself and to literary history, of the dangers of a transition period. It can hardly be said that either Rogers or Campbell is a difficult poet to criticise, for, though estimates of both may differ considerably, the difference, as hinted already, will depend almost entirely on the general attitude of the particular critic towards poetry102

Lesser Poets, 790 1837

[CH.

-a thing which can be allowed for, and compensated, with almost mathematical accuracy. No such process seems to be available in the case of the third remaining member of Byron's selected group', Moore. It is almost unnecessary to say that he was extraordinarily popular in his own time; and this popularity had the most solid results, running hard, in all material ways, that of Scott and Byron. Not only did he receive three thousand pounds for the copyright of Lalla Rookh, but the actual sale of the much shorter and vastly inferior Loves of the Angels brought him in one thousand in the first few months. Although not a few of the Irish Melodies are masterpieces in their own kind, it would be interesting to know if any other poet ever received, as Moore is said to have done, during a great number of years, 'a hundred guineas apiece' or their equivalent at the time, for each of more than a hundred and thirty short songs2. The Paradise Lost comparison, misleading as it may be, certainly does come rather pat here. But the rebate of posthumous criticism on this prodigal reward has been heavy. For something like half a century it has been rare to find an estimate of Moore which, if not positively contemptuous, has not been at least apologetic. He is, perhaps, the best example existing to prove that, in literature, an accumulation of venial sins is much more dangerous than the commission of one capital sin or even more; and that, to any but exceptionally critical judgments to that manner happily born, and in that manner carefully bred, such an accumulation will not be compensated by an accompanying accumulation of non-capital merits. And yet, Moore's sins are but slight; in no case more than defects, and, in some cases, capable of being vindicated fron the charge of being sins at all; while his merits are extremely numerous and, in some cases, of a kind the reverse of vulgar. It is not true that he was, in any bad sense, a toadeater, though, in certain ways, like Kingsley's John Brimblecombe, he might appear to have 'a gnathonical or parasitic spirit.' He had, indeed, a catlike disposition to curl himself up near something or somebody comfortable; 1 We have-a trivial but not quite irrelevant fact-one record in Moore's own pleasant words (Poems, 1-vol. edn, p. 432 and note) of a meeting of all this group except Scott, with no one else present, at dinner in Campbell's house at Sydenham. Into further biographical details, save those glanced at in the text, it is not necessary to enter in the case of any of the three. All lived literary lives of the ordinary kind, varied, in Rogers's case, with a little business; in his, and in Moore's, with a great deal of society; and in all with a certain amount of foreign travel. Campbell's domestic life was rather exceptionally unhappy, by no one's fault; Moore's was very happy. 2 Even if there is a mistake here, and the payment was 'a hundred guineas a part,' of which there were ten and a supplement, it would have been handsome.v]

Moore

103

and it is amusing to find that, even in Paris, he was wretched till he managed to find a new Mayfield or Sloperton, not at Lord Moira's or Lord Lansdowne's door, but in 'a cottage belonging to our kind Spanish friends the V...... Is, and a few steps from their house.' But it does not appear that Moore was any more inclined to put up with insulting treatment than the cat itself is. Nobody ever doubted his courage, though the Jeffrey duel may have had a touch of the ludicrous; his conduct in the difficulties brought upon him by the fraud and flight of his deputy at Bermuda presents a memorable contrast, refreshing on his side if saddening on the other, to the conduct of Theodore Hook in almost precisely similar circumstances; and, even with that rather difficult person Byron, he seems to have maintained perfectly independent relations. For some time past, indeed, there has been a tendency to affect disgust at his destruction of Byron's Memoirs. One would like to be quite sure, considering the symptoms of public taste at all times and certainly not least of late, whether resentment at the loss of something supposed to be piquant and naughty has not more to do with this than virtuous indignation at an imputed breach of trust. At any rate, it is nearly certain that, putting certain famous cruces aside, the Memoirs were much more likely to show Byron's bad side than his good one; that they were left to Moore in absolute property; and that their publication would have brought him in far more money than the Lj.fe, good as it was and handsomely as it was remunerated. But someone may say 'Never mind his character or his life. He shall be a not dishonourable little fellow if you like. But there is a foible, if not a taint, all over his literature. He is almost always trivial; and, even when he is not that, he is never intense. He never reaches passion, but only sentiment; and that sentiment is too often mawkish if not even rancid. He is almost purely imitative-at least in poems of any pretension. He is a clever craftsman, but never a real artist. He plays with patriotism, with politics, with everything. His "prettiness" is only a mincing artificial variety; and his "favour" was a thing of mere fashion, not long out of date.' That, one believes, is a pretty fair summary of the unfavourable, which seems to have become also the general, attitude to Moore; for nobody pays much attention now to the schoolboy 'improprieties' of the 'Little' poems, which were never very shocking, and of which, indeed, the poems have been purged in all their legitimate editions for more than a century. And, certainly, no person of sense will regard Moore as a serious104I

Lesser Poets, 1790 ---837

[CH.

'traitor.' Indeed, it is a clause in the more savage indictments that his nationalism was wholly insincere. The more moderate charge suggested above can, perhaps, be best traversed by a counter statement a little more in detail1. There can be little doubt that Moore has suffered in more ways than one from the extreme voluminousness of his writings. The standard one-volume edition of his Poems, subtracting The Epicurean (an exceedingly good piece of ornate prose), contains nearly seven hundred double columned pages, which frequently themselves contain from eighty to a hundred lines apiece. The table of contents fills nearly twenty columns, with sometimes sixty entries in each-the individual poems running from a distich to a series of some thousands of lines. It does not suit the habits of the present day to read all this; still less, to take the slight trouble necessary to understand it; for much of it is 'occasional' and requires commentary. And yet, it may be said unhesitatingly that, unless the whole of it is read, or, at least, what seems to the present writer an impossibly exhaustive selection of all its departments, Moore will not be properly known. For one remarkable point about him will otherwise escape notice; and that is the curiously pervading and adequate character of such goodness as he possesses. Moore may not meet the lofty demands of lovers of 'high seriousness,' but he is never bad except in his few and short serious satires, Corruption, Intolerance, etc., where he was trying something-and a very difficult thingfor which he was not in the least fitted; and in the rant of the 'Phelim Connor' letters in The Fudge Family, which may itself have been intended as satire of the kind which he could manage. He may not soar very high, he may not dive very deep; but he skims the surface with a curiously light, deft and variously fluttering wing. Trivial he may be; mediocre, in a certain sense, he may be; but one remembers the just protest of even the severe Boileau in another case-II n'est pas mddiocrement gai; and some would add and maintain pretty stoutly that, now and then, II n'est pas m6diocrement tendre. One thing no competent and fairminded enemy has ever 1 To bring ' compurgators' for Moore at any length here would be superfluous. But Hazlitt's praise, though it has been discounted as due to political partisanship, must not be neglected. And those who think it sufficient to dismiss Moore with the stock ticket of 'tawdry' should, perhaps, be informed that Hartley Coleridge, a very considerable critic and a man than whom it is hardly possible to imagine anyone more unlike Moore in blood, temper, literary tastes and almost everything else, quite seriously called the Irish poet's Pegasus 'a milk-white palfrey with rainbow wings.'v]

Moore

1o5

denied him-an almost unique faculty of marrying words to music and music to words. Part of this skill, it may be said, has little or nothing to do with poetical merit, but another part of it has; and Moore has rarely received sufficient credit for the remarkable skill with which he effects strictly prosodic variations. But the still more purely poetical value, excluding even prosodic considerations, of the best of his songs in Irish Melodies, in National Airs and in half a dozen other collections has been strangely belittled by some good judges. Grant that to transfer Ben Jonson's scorn from prose to verse, some of the most popular, such as The Minstrel Boy and The Last Rose of Summer, and a good many others are somewhat 'flashy things,' only prejudice or that lack of freshness of taste which transfers its own faults to the things distasted, or sheer insensibility, can deny a true, if not the rarest or finest, poetic touch to Oft in the stilly night (however little fond one may be of forms like 'stilly'), At the mid hour of night when stars are weeping (a wonderful rhythm), I saw from the beach and others yet which might be named almost by dozens. The notes to Lalla Rookh (which nobody need read) are said to bore a generation which thinks it knows everything already; and the verse-tale of this particular kind is wholly out of fashion. Yet, there are some who, after knowing the poem almost by heart in youth and reading it at different times later, have still found 'The Veiled Prophet' a much more interesting person to read about than some others of their youthful acquaintances; while, in the way of light, sweet, meringue-like verse, 'Paradise and the Peri' is still not easily to be beaten. Moreover, even Moore's lightest verse can only be neglected at no small loss. Our fathers well knew The Fudge Family in their French and English experiences, and The Two-Penny Post Bag and the cloud of minor satiric trifles; and scores of delectable tags which enliven other peoples' work were borrowed from them. The felicitous impertinence, neither ill-natured nor ill-bred, which Moore had at command is, perhaps, nowhere better shown than in the famous or should-be famous suggestion as to Rokeby (put quite properly in a publisher's mouth) that Scott Having quitted the Borders to seek new renown Is coming by long quarto stages to town, And beginning with Rokeby (the job's sure to pay) Means to do all the gentlemen's seats by the way. But there are a thousand examples of it nearly or quite as good, and it attaches itself to matters political, social, ecclesiastical andio6

Lesser Poets, 1790- 1837

[CH.

miscellaneous in a way that ought to amuse, and could not seriously annoy, anyone who has not a rather regrettable proportion of the dunce or of the prig or of both in his composition. This mediocrity, really not ungolden and not of the kind that the Latin sentence blasts, is the note of all Moore's verse-sentimental or jocular. If it offends exclusive lovers of the sublime, they must be offended; but there is a fortunate possibility of being able to appreciate Shakespeare or Shelley, Milton or Keats, at the greatest perfection of any or all, and yet to find a pastime of pleasure, now and then, in Moore's abundant store of sentiment that, if sometimes more or less superficial, is never wholly insincere, and in his satire which, if never lethal, is always piquant. The three poets just discussed, while, in at least two cases, they deserve their place at the head of this chapter by a certain comparative 'majority' in real worth, and in all three by prescription, have, also, an independent historical right to it. They all (it was the reason of Byron's selection of them for his battle-royal of poets) affected, in different ways, the older or classical school. We may now turn from them to a larger and younger group who, partly, no doubt, because of their being younger, belong decidedly to the other school or division. They represent the generation born between the birth-years of Keats and Tennyson; and it has sometimes been proposed to make of them a definite batch or squad of intermediates between the first and definitely Georgian romantic group from Wordsworth to Keats himself and the definitely Victorian poetry (harbingered before strictly Victorian times, but carried out in them) by Tennyson, the Brownings and their followers. There is, perhaps, some better excuse for this than a mere rage for classification. To exercised critical judgments, a certain transitional character does certainly pervade all or most of this company. They were not in a position, as Tennyson and Browning were if they chose, to imbibe the influence of all their great elders just mentioned, before they themselves wrote, or at least published, anything. The strong places of pedagogy and of criticism were still, in their youthful time, largely, if not universally, occupied by what their own French contemporaries disrespectfully called perruques. If there had been any man of absolutely firstrate genius among them, this state of things might not merely have provoked revolt-which it did-but have brought about the complete victories afterwards achieved by their own juniors. But they all belonged to the new crusade, and, ifv]

Hartley Coleridge

I07

none of them quite reached Jerusalem, they did notable things somewhere about Antioch. We may list them alphabetically as follows: Beddoes, Hartley Coleridge, Darley, Hood, Richard Henry (fantastically Hengist) Home, Praed, Sir Henry Taylor, Thomas Wade, C. J. Wells and Charles Whitehead. Their births date from that of Darley, in the same year with that of Keats, to Wade's, ten years later, and group themselves symmetrically in a single decade, on either side of the parting of the centuries. They have all felt strongly the literary influences which helped to determine the work of the greater group before them-the recovery of older (especially Elizabethan) English literature; the discovery of foreign; the subtle revival of imagination that is not confined to 'ideas furnished by the senses'; the extension of interest in natural objects and the like. If whatever influence may be assigned to the French revolution and the great war is less immediate with them, it has, in their case, the strength of retrospect and the fresh impetus of the unsettled state of politics, society and thought, which the revolution and the war left behind them. But there is still about them a great deal that is undigested and incomplete; and no one of them has a genius, or even a temperament, strong enough to wrest and wrench him out of the transition stage. Nearly the eldest, the most famous by birth and promise, but, in a way, the most unfortunate, was Hartley Coleridge1. There is neither space nor necessity here to tell over again the pitiful story of the promise of his youth, recorded not merely by his father but by men so little given to mere sentimentalism as Southey and Wordsworth, and of the lamentable failure of his manhood. It is permissible to think that he was harshly and rather irrationally treated at Oriel. If a probationer fellow disqualifies himself by drunkenness, he does not deserve a solatium of ~300, and, if he deserves a solatium of ~300, his fault can scarcely have been one of a hopelessly disqualifying nature. But, however great may have been the shock of disappointment at this disgrace, and at the loss of the life of studious ease for which alone he was fitted, it cannot have caused, though it may have determined and rendered incurable, that fatal paralysis of will which he inherited from his 1 Anyone who wishes to appreciate Hartley should look at the generally neglected fragment of his Prometheus, which, it is important to remember, preceded Shelley's masterpiece. S. T. C.'s adverse criticism (he was rather a Roman father in that respect, if not in others) and, perhaps, the Oriel calamity arrested the composition. It must have been, no doubt, in any case, a much lesser thing than Shelley's; but it would have been not damagingly different, and it might have been good.io8

Lesser Poets, 1790 18 3 7

[CH.

father in an aggravated form. This not merely hampered him in schoolmastering-that is not surprising-but stunted and made abortive the poetical and critical genius which he certainly possessed. He did attain, by good luck, by kindness of friends and by his own indifference to elaborate comfort, a life, if not of studious ease, at least of almost entire, or very slightly taxed, leisure, with considerable facility for poetic and other composition. On the margins of books and even newspapers, as well as in a few finished and published papers, he showed that he possessed a critical faculty not much short, on individual points, of his father's or of Hazlitt's; and he also wrote verse. But a fanciful eugenist might have argued that Hartley only inherited that portion of poetical spirit which his father had shown before the child's own birth. The greater part of Hartley's poems certainly makes one think rather of the Coleridge before 1797 than of the poet of The Ancient Mariner and Kubla Khan and Christabel. He knew his limits ('I am one of the small poets'), though the beautiful and touching piece Poietes ApoietesNo hope have I to live a deathless namehalf contradicts its own assertion: and to it may be added the fine sonnet to Shakespeare (which, with Matthew Arnold's companion poem in verse and Dryden's short description in prose, may be ranked for combined adequacy and brevity, on a thousand times' attempted subject), the striking pair on Youth, A Medley, the most Shakespearean of Shakespearean imitations, When I review the course that I have run; the Homer, almost as good as the Shakespeare, the sonnet on the extraordinarily difficult subject Prayer and one or two others. The 'sonnet's narrow ground'just suited Hartley; for, though the far-brought fancies of his youth did not wholly desert his age, they found no power in him to carry them further still, or shape them into abiding and substantial form. Nor is it too charitable, too fanciful, or too obvious, to assign part, at least, of his failure to his time-a time with the old assisting convictions or conventions broken down and the new not firmly set. Thomas Hood and Winthrop Mackworth Praed, though moving in very different spheres and, so far as one knows, strangers to one another in life, are indissolubly associated in literature, owing to the singular 'double arrangement' of their combination of serious and comic work, and of the character of at least theV]

Hood

o09

comic work of both. This latter, in its more special aspect, may be postponed for a little, so that we may group it further in a way not unimportant or uninteresting to the historical student of literature. It is sufficient here to dismiss as unprofitable and unnecessary the question whether, in any case, serious or comic, there was a debt owing on either side to the other. Mere partisans have sometimes excited themselves over this question1, but it is of no real importance. Although they pair off in so remarkable a manner, each, to eyes of any critical discernment, has a perfectly sufficient idiosyncrasy. It was long the case, and it may be doubted whether it has entirely ceased to be so, that the fame of Hood's serious work was largely, if not completely, obscured by that of his comic, with the exception of the two great popular-sentimental favourites The Song of the Shirt and The Bridge of Sighs. It is well known that Thackeray, in one of those impulsive outbursts which have been often misinterpreted, expressed himself as rather indignant at Hood's comic avocation from his real business. No man's memory and reputation have been more cruelly overloaded and overwhelmed by the publication of heaps of what is only not sheer rubbish because it served once to win bread for a true poet and an admirable man of letters, and because there is nothing in it in the least disgraceful. But, apart even from the very best of the comic work, which is to be noticed later, apart from the ' sensational pieces' The Song and The Bridge, which make their appeal at once to all those who are likely to appreciate them, Hood has to his credit a body of purely serious poetical work neither aiming at mere popularity, nor deliberately eschewing it, work to be taken at a purely poetic valuation and judged on that, which (even though fifteen editions of it sold in as many years after his death) is still far too often neglected, and, even when not quite neglected, is far too seldom accorded its proper rank. It was, perhaps, in the circumstances, a minor misfortunesimilar to the major one of the huge unsifted dust-heap of the Works-that there were included in the collection of his Serious Poems, made just after his death, even such in themselves excellent things as Miss Kilmansegg and the Clapham Academy ode. For public taste was, is and probably always will be, not merely a 'greatsized monster of ingratitudes' but one of haste, indiscrimination 1 It turns very mainly on the other question of priority in the use of what has been called ' antithetical punning.' This, even as regards the bare chronology of the writings of the two, is doubtful; and every one ought to know that there are much older examples, which each might have taken as pattern, independently, if either wanted any pattern at all.IIO

Lesser Poets, 1 790  837

[CH.

and other bad things. It had been accustomed to consider Hood a mere joke-smith; and it was sure to fix on these and one or two others as instances of his real vocation. All this serio-comic or tragi-comic stuff were much better segregated, and the removal would leave nearly three quarters of a volume of some four hundred pages full of poetry pure and simple. Nothing in this is rubbish; some of it is extraordinarily good. The Haunted House is one of the minor, and not so very minor, marvels of English poetry. The only objection that one can imagine as being brought against it, by anyone who can appreciate it at all, is that the craftsmanship is almost too unconcealedly and obtrusively perfect1 -the accumulation of the unusual, stately, mournful rhythm of the stanza; the carefully constructed and diffused detail and the atmosphere of decay, destruction and dread; the as careful selection of language tending to the same object but never diverging into extravagance or the disgusting; above all, the triumphant avoidance of that slip into the ludicrous which these horror-plays and poems constantly commit. The Elm Tree is nearly as good, though, perhaps, it might have been shortened. The more popular Eugene Aram and The Bridge of Sighs itself are not flawless, but the grimness of the one and the pathos of the other could have been attained by none save a true poet. The Plea of the Midsummer Fairies may be thought to need no praise after Lamb's; yet, it may not be impertinent, and it is certainly not rash, to pronounce it, after nearly a hundred years, the most charming poem of some size and pretension which has missed its due meed of general appreciation during the interval. It was rather unwise to try Hero and Leander again; and the anapaestic metre of Lycus the Centaur was ill chosen-the gallop of the centaur probably suggested it. Yet, if anyone will read these two poems patiently he will hardly think otherwise than nobly of them. But Hood was by no means only a master of the heavier plectrum. He could write songs and shorter pieces generally, light, but not in the least comic, with singular skill. Some of these, no doubt, have been confounded, with Moore's and others, under the general censuretickets 'tinkling,' 'trivial,' 'tawdry,' 'sentimental' and what not. Anyone who chooses may, of course, pin one or another, or several, of these epithets to A Death Bed, and even to the great Farewell, Life stanzas written on his own death-bed; to the ballad (It was 1 Wordsworth, it may be remembered, made no very different objection from this to The Ancient Mariner itself.v]

Praed

III

not in the Winter) of the time of roses; to Fair Ines and A lake and a Fairy boat and the bitter-sweet irony of Spring it is cheery and the stateliness and fervour of Giver of glowing light and The stars are with the Voyager. But a more catholic criticism will simply disregard tickets or, perhaps, detach them and throw them on the rubbish heap, their appointed place, saying, 'These things are poetry: and this was a poet.' Merely as a serious poet, Praed holds a far lower place than Hood; in fact, with one doubtful exception, to be noticed presently, he has nothing at all to compare with The Haunted House or The Plea of the Midsummer Fairies, and not much to show with the shorter poems. Arminius escapes the bad side of mediocrity in one way and Josephine in another; but the best and, perhaps, the only distinguished thing Praed has done in this kind is the strange and beautiful Time's Song, O'er the level plains, where mountains meet me as I go, unusual and effective alike in rhythm, in the phrase adroitly broken to suit the rhythmical movement, and in the economy of construction, detail and explanation, leading up to a kind of 'the rest is silence.' But he never repeated this in a short poem, or expanded the method in a longer. The fact is that the ironic and humourous impulse, partly, no doubt, determined by Byronic influence at first, but diverging into ways not in the least like Byron's, was generally omnipresent and omnipotent with him, and almost invariably deflected his treatment into the sort of mixed mode which Southey had started in things like The Old Woman of Berkeley, and which Barham, a much older man than Praed, was to practise with signal success a little later. Not a few both of the Tales and of other pieces, from the schoolboy Gog onwards, have this hybrid character. But it produced at least one thing which is a masterpiece of its kind and which contrasts again most curiously with Hood's tragi-comedy. In this latter, The Desert Born, Miss Kilmansegg herself and the rest, the comic (even where there is positively tragic matter) always has the upper hand and, sometimes, burlesques the tragic itself. The Red Fisherman has, of course, a comic side or, rather, one may say, a comic outside or jacket to it; and it is full of excursions in themselves comical. But these are used almost in the manner in which Shakespeare uses similar devices, sometimes to set off that seriousness which, no doubt, is greater in him than in Praed. With Hood, the 'finish,' as wine-tasters say, the flavour that is1 2 Lesser Poets, 17 9 18 3 7 [cH. left in the mouth, is always comic unless he is wholly serious. The reader of The Red Fisherman, if he be a fit reader, laughs as he passes at The water was as dark and rank As ever a Company pumped, and at the corporation banquet and the political jibes. But what he carries away with him, like the fisherman's hook in the actual case, is the description of the pool, and the terrible angler, and the death-gasps of the knight and 'the eyes of Mistress Shore.' Even the battle of hook and crook which just saves the abbot, though it is humorous, is not ludicrous; and these passionate touches, with the whole effect they produce, taken with Time's Song, help the more purely comic verse, which we shall notice later, to show what a poet of the higher kind Praed might have been in addition to the lighter and gayer singer that he was. Henry (afterwards Sir Henry) Taylor offers one of the interesting poetic idiosyncrasies which are pretty strongly marked off from others, but which, somehow, fail to mark for themselves, and in the circle of their own performances, a definite and enduring achievement. That his main work was dramatic may partly, but will not wholly, account for this. That the enormous influence of the Elizabethan drama on the romantic revival should provoke direct imitation of itself was almost a matter of course; and it belongs to other divisions of this work to tell how all the poetsfrom Wordsworth, the most undramatic of all great writers, to Scott, the most dramatic of all men who have written bad dramastried it and how almost all, except Shelley, who might have been thought least likely to succeed, failed. But, with all of them, drama, fortunately, was a bywork. With Taylor (for even his remarkable lyrical faculty was essentially germane to the Elizabethan school of drama), the dramatic form was all-pervading and all-powerful. People have forgotten most things of his save Philip van Artevelde, which, to most, is now itself not much more than a name; but Edwin the Fair and St Clement's Eve (if not, also, Isaac Comnenus) ought to be read, and will hardly be read once only by those who can taste them at all. Still, Philip van Artevelde, no doubt, is his diploma-piece and not merely that. It failed on the stage; though, if the apparently growing taste for psychological plays were some day to unite itself with a taste for literature, the case might be altered. But, for a time, it had great vogue with readers of worth; and Taylor, perhaps, may be thought to have been the most unfortunate ofv] Sir Henry Taylor 13 all these 'intermediates' in being pushed from his stool, almost before he was fairly settled on it, by Tennyson, who used quite different forms and methods, and by Browning, who partly used the same, but added many others and wielded them with much greater power. As a dramatic poem, Philip van Artevelde stands very high. It is entirely free from the iciness which, being mistaken for something Greek (Greek tragedy cold!), at first attracted people in the almost exactly (though much more shortlived) contemporary Ion of Thomas, afterwards Sir Thomas, Noon Talfourd. The part of Elena is, perhaps, nearer than that of any heroine in any modern English play (putting Shelley's Beatrice aside) to something great; and there are in it, as also in the other plays, almost innumerable passages of real poetic thought expressed in really poetic words. But Taylor had the fault-common to both Wordsworth and Southey, of whom he was a kind of disciple-of want of concentration in writing; he lacked action and narrative power; and it was seldom that he either would or could give vent to his lyric gift. The present writer has never seen an adequate selection from Taylor, though one may exist. It would be as scrappy as Enyland's Parnassus itself; but it would certainly show the author's right to a place on the sacred hill. Some of Taylor's few but remarkable lyrics give evidence of a sort of underground vein which was rarely tapped (and which may be sought in vain in Talfourd). Such are the famous, or should-be famous, 'Quoth tongue of neither maid nor wife,' in Philip van Artevelde and the song of Thorbiorga in Edwin the Fair and divers passages in the scanty, and now, perhaps, rarely read, Minor Poems. They connect him with the rest of the group mentioned above, and with one or two others who are all, or almost all, more definitely lyrical in main substance, and who strangely anticipate not merely Tennyson and Browning, but, even still more, the spasmodics, the pre-Raphaelites and other poets such as the late John Davidson, who have touched the present day. These are the men who, while feeling strongly the 'antecedent' influences, as they may be termed-Elizabethan, German and miscellaneous-though not, as yet, much touched by the purely medieval, derive more directly from Coleridge, Shelley and Keats, especially from the first two; men who showed already, though in a crude and half embryonic form, the strong tendency of the nineteenth century towards occasional and, therefore, lyrical verse; and who, while underlying all the objections (quantum valeant) of Wordsworth to The Ancient Mariner, possess something of the

E. L. XII. CH. V.

8I 4

Lesser Poets, 1790- 837

[CH.

merits which even Wordsworth allowed to that exceptionable work of his yokefellow. Of these, the eldest was George Darley, who, as mentioned above, anticipated the others by nearly a decade. Darley is a poet ill to recommend to any but those who, either by nature or by study or by both, are initiate in at least the outer mysteries of poetry; and even some adepts cannot stomach his most ambitious work, the plays Becket and Ethelstan. Some physical and some mental disabilities seem to have combined to alloy and hamper his idiosyncrasy. He was an incurable stammerer, and could not, like Lamb, turn this blemish to his own or other people's favour. He was 'a great arithmetician' and, though the one kind of 'numbers' certainly does not interfere with the enjoyment of the other, Mathesis, except under the mantle of Urania, has not fostered many poets. Lastly, he was a considerable, and a rather harsh, critic after the ugly 'strip-and-whip' fashion of his time; and, though some may say that it would have been better if he had criticised his own work more, there seems to have been a conflict in him of the poetical and critical natures. Even his lyrical gift, acknowledged by the best judges among his contemporaries and successors to be extraordinary and constantly shown in The Errors of Ecstacie, in the verse scattered about the prose Labours of Idleness and elsewhere, in the pastoral drama Sylvia and in the wonderful outburst of his masterpiece Nepenthe, too seldom takes the clear, pure, finished form which, sooner or later, assures a permanent place. It is often, and in Nepenthe most of all, unintelligible to those who demand a definite and fairly obvious meaning translatably expressed; it sometimes (the crowning instance is the loathsome rubbish, for one fears no softer phrase will do, of the Dwerga part in Becket, on which the author obstinately prided himself) shows gross lapses of taste; it has, more frequently still, ill-blended sentiment and grotesque; and, sometimes, it suffers from that rather fatal fluency which seems especially to beset Irish poets. But, ever and anon, come splendid bursts. Those who can dive in poetic whirlpools will find the gold cups oftenest in Nepenthe itself and, sometimes, in The Errors of Ecstacie, which, while it came long before Bailey's Festus and longer before Dobell's Balder and Alexander Smith's Life Drama, contains something of the essence of all three in five and thirty merciful pages. Those, on the other hand, who want poetic sweetmeats all ready for consumption in a separate and at once accessible form, have only to turn the7 TV 7 7



v] Jarley. Beddoes I 5 pages of Sylvia, where the lyrics obligingly stand out, or to go straight to the minor poems. The once immensely popular I've been roaming may strike most people now as only a sample of the 'Mooreish melody'; and, though pretty, is not supremely so. But the equally wellknown It is not Beauty I demand (which, in its Carolinity, deceived the very elect in the person of Francis Turner Palgrave) is quite a different thing; The Enchanted Lyre, The Maiden's Grave are not mere banjo music, and Sylvia, though much of its main stuff is of very little worth, is spangled all over with most delightful snatches of lyric. At his very best, however, Darley never reached the astonishing intensity and poignancy of poetic appeal which is found in a few things of Thomas Lovell Beddoes, the youngest, as Darley was the eldest, of the group, and which, if concentrated only in these few, diffuses itself into a strange poetic atmosphere all over his fantastic work. Beddoes was unquestionably mad when, just before his death, he made repeated and, at last, successful attempts at suicide; this madness, beyond much question, had developed itself in, at least, the latter half of his not very short life; and it may be doubted whether he was ever entirely sane. But, as has been remarked over and over again, madness will neither make nor break a poet; and it is a chance whether it stimulates or checks, colours or discolours, his work. Both the bad and the good results are clear enough in the poems-dramatic, after a fashion, and lyrical, after the best fashion-which we have from Beddoes. The main constituent of this work is a play entitled Death's Jest Book or The Fool's Revenge, which was ready for publication as early as the spring of 1829. It was referred by the author to B. W. Procter and other timid critics, and pronounced by them, perhaps naturally, but unfortunately, to require revision. Beddoes submitted, and re-wrote it again and again, but never got it finished. After his death, it was published, but with what regard to the variants we do not know. He had earlier, at Oxford, published two much slighter productions, The Bride's Tragedy and The Improvisatore, and his remains furnished his friend Kelsall (to whom they were left and who handed them over to Browning) with some miscellaneous poems, which were increased when Beddoes's work was reprinted by Edmund Gosse with Browning's permission. Beddoes has been called a link between Shelley and Browning himself. He was an avowed devotee of Shelley, and took a warm interest in the task of bringing out that poet's 8-2I 6 Lesser Poets, 7 9 0-18 3 7 [CH. posthumous poems. But there are also strong influences of Keats in his poems (see, especially, Pygmalion and Letter from Oxford), and, on the whole, the real filiation of his work, both dramatic and lyric, goes straight back to the larger Elizabethan time. Yet, though the influence of such writers as Tourneur and Webster is obvious, it is a great mistake to take him, as has been done, for a mere composer of Elizabethan pastiche, a word for which we have unluckily no exact synonym in English, though we have plentiful examples of the thing. Beddoes, in many ways, is intensely and, indeed, prophetically modern; he was a trained physician and physiologist; there is not a little of modern science in his thought, and his reader is often reminded of Ibsen in his more poetical plays. It is not quite clear whether Death's Jest Book, as we have it, is a made text out of the three distinct versions which were said to exist, or merely one of them; and this makes it very difficult to judge it as a whole. Of the frequent greatness of the blank verse and of the still more exceptional greatness of the lyric found in it and outside it, there can be little dispute among impartial judges. For some years, Dream-Pedlary has even been near, if it has not actually incurred, that rare but formidable danger which attends enthusiastic laudation by the few, at first adopted by the many and then kicked against by them. But the Dirge for Wolfram ('If thou wilt ease thine heart') is fully its equal; and such a pair it will be almost impossible to find in English outside the work of the very greatest of our poets. The same touch, if not the same completeness of working, may be found in many other places. There may be more doubt about Beddoes's complete success anywhere in the line of grim humour such as Old Adam, the carrion crow and the Song of the Stygian Naiades. But, over these, as over all the rest, there hovers that atmosphere of real, if seldom perfect, poetry referred to above. To be content with this, or even to perceive it, is, no doubt, not for everybody. It is easy to dismiss Beddoes as a mere producer of Fantastic beauty, such as lurks In some wild poet when he works Without a conscience or an aiml, and of that not very often; it is easy to dismiss him as an Elizabethan copyist; not least easy, perhaps, to obtain the credit of wise moderation by this and that admission. But, historically, 1 Was Tennyson thinking of Beddoes? In Mlemoriam and Death's Jest Book were published in the same year, 1850. But, also, in that year, Miss Zoe King, Beddoes's cousin, met Tennyson on his wedding tour and lent him a copy of Beddoes, whom he 'rated highly.'v]

fells. Horne

I"7

Beddoes is an invaluable instance of that curious influence of transition periods on which we may say something true if not new at the close of this chapter. Personally and individually, he is an instance of the kind of poet whom it would be more or less preposterous to call a great poet, and who yet has produced things which only the greatest poets can match. The remaining members of this group, though sometimes interesting both as persons and as poets, must be treated more briefly, for they are rather 'curiosities of literature' than great men of letters. More especially does this position belong to Wells. In a long life (very little disturbed, it would seem, either by the legal or the professorial business which, at times, he attempted), he produced nothing but a few prose stories and tales, and the remarkable closet-drama Joseph and his Brethren, originally published, 1823-4, under a pseudonym. We are told that three versions of Beddoes's chief play exist in manuscript: and it appears not impossible that three different versions of Wells's will some day exist in print. For he very considerably altered the original in the reprint which, fifty years later, was brought about by the enthusiasm of the poet Swinburne, and he is said to have altered that reprint itself still more with manuscript corrections and additions not yet made public. The drama, undoubtedly, is a remarkable production; but it is probable that the very high praise bestowed on it has been the cause of a good deal of disappointment even to readers who were quite prepared to admire. The character of Phraxanor (Potiphar's wife) has a certain force and even original touches poetically expressed; but the enormous verbiage of her speeches drowns the spirit of these. Wells is said to have burnt several volumes of manuscript poetry and prose; and, although some fine things might have been found in them, it is difficult to be very sorry. For, at first, in all cases, he admittedly wrote with ostentatious contempt of the most ordinary care; and, if the current version of Joseph and his Brethren is a fair specimen of his attempts at revision, care would probably have done very little good. His friend, eulogist and very close contemporary Richard H. Horne presented himself somewhat more seriously as a candidate for distinction in letters, both prose and verse. He was a man of many adventures in life as well as in literature, but a fanciful moralist might have drawn evil prognostications, and might now draw tragic warning, from the rather wellknown story of Horne snow-balling Keats when the latter, as 'an old boy,' came toII8

Lesser Poets, 1790- 1837

[CH.

his Edmonton school, where Horne actually was a scholar. Horne bombarded the temple or castle of the muses with many balls of both verse and prose for many years; but they were apt to be cold shot. His New Spirit of the Age, written, it is true, in a sort of collaboration with Mrs Browning (then Miss Barrett), contains, with a few better things, some of the most inept criticism in English; and what it is possible to know of his immense journey-work does not seem to be much better. His tragedies, from Cosmo de Medici and The Death of Marlowe (both of 1837) to Laura Dibalzo, more than forty years later, are, as wholes, rather indigestible, with really poetic passages here and there, but not enough to season the rest. His own rather puerile and, at first, at least, somewhat costly, jest of publishing his one poem of merit, the quasi-epic Orion, at the price of one farthing, though it may have attracted attention at first, has, probably, done more harm than good in the long run by inviting cheap epigram. Orion is worth a very considerable number of farthings, and, provided that its reader goes no farther in its author's work, he will probably think Horne a better poet than any other of the group here immediately associated with him. It is, no doubt, permeated by that dangerous notion about poetry illustrating the growth of a poet's mind for which Wordsworth, though he made atonement for it in his own case, was mainly responsible, and its allegory has offended some who have forgotten Hazlitt's final phrase on this subject-that allegory will bite nobody if people will let it alone. In fact, the final passage, as to the end of Akinetos (the 'Great Unmoved'-the representative of obstinate conservatism, who is literally petrified at last), may commend itself, as really fine poetry, to persons who rather sympathise with Akinetos himself. Nor does this stand alone. It was, perhaps, not surprising that, in 1831, with the great poets of the early nineteenth century all dead, silent or producing things hardly worthy of them, and with Tennyson and Browning but just visible to any, and actually seen by few, the Spenserians of the third Whitehead's1 Solitary should have seemed to promise a poet. But, if the poem be examined carefully, it will be found to be little more than a clever mosaic of variously borrowed fancy, phrase and cadence, super-excellent as a prize poem, but, like most prize poems, possessing hardly any 1 After Paul and William, Charles. The difference of the 'minority' of his pre. decessors and himself would make a fair text for a comparison of eighteenth and nineteenth century poetry of the lesser kind.v] Wzhitehead anid JYade I 9 symptomatic or germinal evidence in it. At any rate, though before his dry- and wet-rot in the Bohemia of fancy and, latterly, the Australia of fact, Whitehead wrote one successful play, The Cavalier, one or two quasi-historical tales or novels of some merit (Jack Ketch, Richard Savage) and some other work, even his eulogists have only discovered in his later pieces a sonnet or two of distinction; (As yonder Lamp in my Vacated Room is that usually quoted1). But sonnet-making itself gives a much higher place to the last of this group, Thomas Wade. He was a friend of the Kembles and was enabled by them to bring out three plays, the first two of which were successful, and the third, The Jew of Arragon, damned, while a fourth and fifth never saw the stage. He wrote various other things, was a journalist for years and left much unpublished; but his fame must rest on the curious volume-not very easy to obtain but quite worth possessing by any lover of poetry-somewhat pretentiously (as some, but not all, think) entitled Mundi et Cordis: de rebus sempiternis et temporariis: Carmina, which appeared in 1835. The 'brevities,' as its author calls them, in the same deliberate quaintness (it would be harsh to call it affectation, for Wade lives very fairly up to his style and title), which the volume contains, are not all sonnets (indeed, the book has an English sub-title Poems and Sonnets) nor are some of the best of them. But Wade had an admirable gift for this form, and wrote it, perhaps, as well as anyone, between Wordsworth and the Rossettis, except Charles Tennyson [Turner]. He was much under the influence of Shelley among his forerunners, and sometimes reminds one of Darley among his contemporaries; but he has a more even taste, if a less fiery imagination, than the author of Nepenthe. He has usually had the least justice done to him of all the group; and he can never be popular. But that atmosphere or aura of poetry which hangs about most of them, and about the character, of which a few words should be said later, are present in and round him in a vaguely diffused, most unboisterous, faintly coloured and perfumed manner which is worth the notice of the student of poetry. The tendency of the group just discussed, with the notable exceptions of Hood and Praed, was not, on the whole, towards light or jocular verse; but, by those two exceptions and others, 1 And 'vacated,' here, is not exactly a felicity. Whitehead was a friend of Dickens; and, at least, thought himself to have 'passed on' the composition of Pickwick to the greater writer. He suggests himself as a possible original for the reflections on ' Horace Kinch and the Dry-rot in Men' (The Uncommercial Traveller), though the circumstances are artistically altered: and though Dickens, no doubt, had more than one painful example in his mind.120

Lesser Poets, 1790 1837

[CH.

such verse was very well represented during the first thirty or forty years of the nineteenth century. It would, indeed, have been strange if things had been otherwise, for the eighteenth had kept unbroken the traditions, and had even increased the means, of this kind of poetry, with a positive extension of its varieties and range; while the greater writers of the actual period, in not a few cases, had shown no disinclination to be wisely foolish in proper places. With Anstey, Williams and Stevenson leading the way to the brilliant political lampooning of the Rolliad, of Wolcot and of the Canning group; with Southey founding the macabre ballad and Coleridge, occasionally, showing what he might have done in that way; with Moore as agreeably effervescent in grotesque as in sentiment; with Shelley capable, now and then, of an uncertain and flickering but humourous or 'humouresque' flash-there was no reason for anybody who had inclinations that way to be ashamed of indulging them. Moreover, the names of Swift and Prior were still, and justly, held great; and 'divine Nonsensia' (in the good, not contemptuous, sense) had counted most of the best English poets from Chaucer, through Shakespeare, downwards as her occasional chaplains. Comparatively early, too, not merely immediate popularity, but lasting and well-deserved reputation, was won by James and Horace Smith, with the ever welcome Rejected Addresses-a collection of parodies of Byron, Scott, Southey and other famous writers of the day which, though it may have been sometimes equalled, had, at its best, certainly never been, and never has been, surpassed for appositeness, good humour as well as humour positive and a lightness which, unlike that of most such work, has never become heavy since. Hood was thirteen and Praed was ten when Rejected Addresses appeared; and both, therefore, were now at an age suitable for such seed to fall into such soil. As was remarked above, in speaking of their serious and half-serious poems, the difference of attitude between them is very remarkable and interesting. That Hood had the deeper and higher poetical genius there can be no doubt, and it was probably not the mere necessities of hackwork which drove him, by reaction, into more definite extravaganza, more horseplay in word and verse, wilder acrobatics and pyrotechnics of punning and the like, when he put himself in the comic vein. It is impossible that a professional of this kind should not, in the actual language of the ring, 'miss his tip' sometimes; there are some people who (it may be thought, unhappily) cannot relish verbal tumbling and metrical fireworks at all; and there are others, less to be commiserated, whov] Comic 11ork of Hood and Praed 12 are soon satiated with either or both. The cruel kindness which, as mentioned, has accumulated not merely the sweepings of Hood's study, but the very rubbish of his literary dustbin more or less pyramidically on his memory, puts him at special disadvantage with all these classes of readers; perhaps with almost any reader who has not a critical sieve under his arm, with which, at need, he can sift away the slag and keep the metal. It is metal far from unattractive to anyone who likes good fun; and there are few places-that is to say books-where such an admirable 'pocket' of it, already pretty well sifted, and varied, from verse to prose, is to be found, as in Up the Rhine and in the cream of Hood's comic poems. But the difference of taste above referred to may always make it half needless and half useless to recommend this part of him. The line which has been, perhaps justly, selected as a testRose knows those bows' woes will always seem to some respectable people an enormous and disgusting puerility. By them, Hood should be generally avoided. Others, who can see in it not, indeed, one of the greatest achievements of human art and genius, but a relishable trifle quite capable of being enjoyed more than once or twice, should let themselves, not in the least pharisaically, say grace before and after it. It was quite possible for Hood to avoid this style; and, without using, as in some of his most famous poems, the contrast of grimness or pathos, to do higher comedy, not farce at all, in verse. The United Family is a good, though very far from the only, instance of this. Nevertheless (for reasons which, no doubt, could be plausibly explained, but which are pretty obvious and not, after all, quite decisive), he is certainly surpassed by Praed in the highest class of what is called 'verse of society,' and especially in that kind of it which might be called pure high-comedy lyric. Fortune of birth and breeding, scholarship, easy temperament and circumstance; wide and, again, fortunate experience of the world; and several other things may be thought to be necessary to this; they certainly are found in company with it in Praed. Idiosyncrasy, in the strictest sense of an often misused word, was present in him in the highest degree; in a degree which could only be fully shown by detailed, and here impossible, contrasts with, say, Prior, Thackeray and the late Locker-Lampson. This idiosyncrasy was produced or affected not merely by the personal essentials or accidents noticed above, but by a curious convergence of the various poetical motives of the time-romantic, satiric, lyrical, musical, technical122

Lesser Poets, 1790- 837

[CH.

and other. There is in Praed something of Scott, something of Byron, something of Moore, something of Canning and something of others; and, yet, the whole blend is Praed and nothing and nobody else. He, in his turn, certainly taught something to Thackeray; but, if there is less depth in his combination of romance and humour than in his greatest pupil's, there is a certain buoyancy and, at the same time, a calm, in the immortal Letter of Advice, which is nowhere else to be found. The way in which Praed picked out the stanza improved downwards from Gay and others to Byron, perfected it still further and infused into it at once the passion of I enter thy garden of Roses and the spirit and zest of Molly Mog, is one of the pleasantest studies in poetical technique and one of the most useful refutations of the fallacy which would make of that subject an affair of 'chalk and blackboard.' But, if anyone shudders at technicalities, let him pass them by and content himself with the more exoteric charms of the poem just mentioned, of The Vicar, of Twenty Eight and Twenty Nine and Goodnight to the Season, of the first Letter from Teignmouth and of a dozen others. Perhaps the already mentioned tender-cruel mercy of reprinting has been exercised too freely even in this case; but, to complain much of it would be to commit that sin which Thackeray himself has stigmatised and to ask for 'a flounder that was all back.' The most remarkable book-as distinguished from scattered pieces of comic or semi-comic verse-in the peculiar style which Southey had almost originated and which Hood and Praed had developed, was published, some of its parts having already, but not long before, appeared, much later than the work of either of the pair, by a man who, nevertheless, was as much Praed's elder as he was Southey's junior. Richard Harris Barham was, indeed, not a young man when, long before the beginning of The Ingoldsby Legends, he wrote anonymously that famous parody of Wolfe's Corunna poem (see below) which was attributed to all sorts of better known persons; and he was an active, and by no means unclerical, parson, as well as a not very successful novelist, before, at nearly fifty, he found the remarkable vocation which he obeyed, without a sign of impoverishment or exhaustion for some decade before his too early, but not very early, death. How little the horse-collar was Barham's single vestment or instrument was shown, once for all, by the beautiful lines, not in the least requiring their Chattertonian pseudo-archaism of spelling, As I lay a thynkynge, which are said to have been his last, and which, novJ

The Ingoldsby Legends

123

doubt, supply the one and sufficient evidence of the undercurrent of feeling necessary to keep fresh and in full flavour such humour as his. For it is a most unfortunate mistake-though one which has been constantly committed, sometimes with the quaintest explosions of virtuous misunderstanding-to regard the fun of The Ingoldsby Legends as merely 'high jinks.' Its period was, of course, the period of that curious institution, and there is the 'high jinks' quality in the Legends. Yet Barham, on the whole, belonged not to the school of his friend Hook always, of Christopher North too often and of Maginn, father Prout and some others, save on the rarest occasions; but, rather, to that, just mentioned, of Hood, Praed and Thackeray himself, who, by the way, imitated Ingoldsby very early. High-principled but feeble-minded persons actually regarded the Legends at the time, and have regarded them since, as an infamous attempt to undermine the high church movement by ridicule; as a defiling of romance; as a prostitution of art; as a glorification of horseplay and brutality; as a perilous palliation of drunkenness, irreverence, loose and improper conduct of all sorts. With quite infinitely less than the provocation of Rabelais, allegations and insinuations of faults not much less heinous than those charged by anti-Pantagruelists were raised, while, for a decade or two, more recently, has been added the sneer of the superior person at 'fun out of fashion.' On the other hand, it is a simple fact that not a few fervent high-churchmen, medievalists, men zealous for religion and devotees of romance, have been among lngoldsby's most faithful lovers. For they have seen that 'Love me and laugh at me' is a motto not in the least selfcontradictory, and that the highest kind of laughter is impossible without at least a little love, and a very high kind of love compatible with at least a grain of laughter. To go straight to the point, The Ingoldsby Legends are examples of the style started by Southey in The Old Woman of Berkeley and other pieces, raised to much higher power both of humour and of poetry and carried out on an instrument of verse which, though it owes a great deal to the poet laureate's principles and practice, attempts variations of a far bolder, more intricate and more symphonic kind. No one who has not studied the Legends from this point of view knows how sure the artist is in handling and fingering all his most complicated arabesques and gambollings. The defects of taste which had been by no means uncommon in the master and which are certainly a danger of the kind, have been, as stated above, enormously magnified byI24

Lesser Poets, 1790- 1837

[CH.

objectors. They may, sometimes, exist; but they are never very heinous, and they are, to a fairly catholic appreciation, carried off by such a flood of fantastic humour, quaint miscellaneous erudition (like Sterne's and Southey's mixed), vivid picture, happy conversation (always a difficult thing to manage in verse), pointed phrase, narrative felicity and refreshing medley of style and subject, that only a critic deaf and blind to the merits can pay much attention to the defects. Not the least interesting feature of the present division is the reappearance, in something like force, of poetesses. They had, indeed, not been wanting since Lady Winchilsea, who, at her birth, or soon afterwards, took, all unwitting, the torch from the hands of 'Orinda' and handed it on in almost the same fashion to the authoress of the Ode to Indifferencel. There had been, more recently, Anna Seward, that swan of Lichfield, who sang so much and so long before her death that she has been entirely inaudible since; and Hannah More that 'powerful versificatrix.' At one time, Anna Letitia Barbauld, by some extraordinary inspiration, had uttered the wonderful last stanza of her 'Life' poem: Life! we've been long together, while, at other times, she had atoned partly for failing to understand The Ancient Mariner by writing one of the best of the many imitations of Collins's Evening, and some verses, more or less 'sacred,' which are not contemptible. Helen Maria Williams, though she became nearly as bad as any Della Cruscan, had, sometimes, been better. But the first thirty years or so of the nineteenth century, even before the definite appearance of Mrs Browning, which does not concern us here, saw, in Joanna Baillie, Mrs Hemans and 'L.E.L.,' three persons who, for no short time and to no few or incompetent persons, seemed to be poetesses; while there were one or two others, such as Caroline Bowles, Southey's second wife and, still more, Sara Coleridge, daughter of 'S. T. C.' and sister of Hartley, who deserve to be added to them. The long life of Joanna Baillie began earlier than that of any of the poets of either sex, outside the retrospect of the last paragraph, who have been mentioned in this chapter, except Rogers; and it continued, like his, till the second half of the nineteenth century. But, except for a tincture of romantic subject, her work bears, and might be expected to bear, the colour of the eighteenth. It consists of a large number of plays-On the Passions and miscellaneous-which were by no means intended to be 1 Mrs Greville.V]

Joanna Baillie

I25

closet-dramas merely, and several of which made more or less successful appearances on the actual stage; of a certain number of lyrics-some in Scots dialect, some in literary English-and of miscellaneous poems of no consequence. The strictly theatrical value of the plays does not much concern us here. Although some fight for it was made at the time by her friends (who were numerous, as she well deserved), it has long been practically 'confessed and avoided.' Whether the poetical value is much greater may be doubted. The composition of most of them, in contrasted exemplification of 'the passions,' as passions, impresses some readers as a sort of involuntary caricature of Jonson's humour-play in tragedy as well as comedy; the verse is remarkably unstimulant, though correct enough, and the general scenery, character-drawing and so forth are essentially of the time before Scott, that is to say, the time when the historic sense, whether in verse or prose fiction, was not. Her lyrics in Scots have been praised by compatriots; but this is largely because they consist of that curious re-hashing of old Scottish ballad- and poem-motive and phrase which the consummate but dangerous example of Burns has vulgarised for the last hundred years; of those not in dialect, The Chough and Crow and Good night have a sort of traditional reputation, which they do not ill deserve, as pleasant, soundhearted, carolling verse. Scott's excessive praise of Joanna needs, of course, allowance for personal friendship as well as for his general critical kindliness; but the fact that it was also due to his recognition of a temper in life and literature akin to his own deserves, in turn, similar recognition. In fact, Joanna, though never in the least mannish, had something virile about her as of a ladylike and poetical Mrs Bagnet. Now, the world is never likely to be over-provided in life, and still less in literature, with Mrs Bagnets. A little more of this not unfeminine virility would have been a great advantage to the two poetesses next to be discussed, though the first of them, at least, undoubtedly had more poetry than Joanna. Both Felicia Dorothea Browne (Mrs Hemans) and Laetitia Elizabeth Landon (L.E.L.) were very popular in their own days, and the first-named has retained a success of esteem with some not despicable judges, together with a hold on actual memory, through 'The Boy stood on the Burning Deck,' and one or two other poems. One may go further, and say that a certain amount of injustice has been done to both, and especially to Mrs Hemans, during the last half, if not three quarters, of a century by Thackeray's 'Miss Bunion.' It was in no way a personal caricature,I26

Lesser Poets, 7 9  8 3 7

[CH.

for Mrs Hemans was almost beautiful, and L.E.L. decidedly, though irregularly, pretty. But it hit their style, and especially their titles, hard, and their sentiment has long been out of fashion. Miss Landon, indeed (whose fate seems still to be wrapped in mystery for some commentators, though, as a matter of fact, it was almost completely cleared up years ago), can never be raised, in the most careful and judicial estimate, to anything but a somewhat interesting historical position. Her technique, though some charitable souls have seen a tendency to improvement at the last, was deplorably bad; and her popularity set a most unfortunate precedent, in this respect, for women verse-writers. Her sentiment and handling of her themes watered out the examples she took from Scott, Byron and Moore, with an equally deplorable excess of original 'gush,' and it is really difficult to name a single poem which can be produced as a competent diploma-piece. But, at one time, she seemed to be a sort of graceful substitute for a pillar: Beddoes, who had real critical power, who wrote as differently as possible and who was not mealy-mouthed, described her, in 1825, as, after the tropical, sunset-like disappearance of Shelley, 'the tender full faced moon of our darkness,' though he certainly added 'milk-and-watery.' She is a sign of the time between Keats and Tennyson, and, if her work does not even, in the words of one of Campbell's best poems, 'show where a garden has been,' it does show where a garden might have been, if time and the muses had been more propitious. The claims of Mrs Hemans are much less hypothetical. If not immaculate in form, she is much better than L.E.L. (who, by the way, wrote one of her least bad poems on Mrs Hemans's death); her models, though they certainly included Byron and Scott, were Coleridge and Wordsworth also, so far as she could manage it; and the dangerous quality of 'Mooreishness' does not much appear in her. Her faults-recognised as such even by generous admirers in her own days, and by charitable critics since-are want of originality, want of intensity and, worst of all, a third, connected with this want of intensity but not quite identical with it and much more wide-ranging, want of concentration. She died at a little over forty, and suffered much from ill-health; yet, she published over twenty volumes of verse in her lifetime, which filled a more closely printed collection of six after her death. Some of the constituents of these, it is true, were narrative poems of length, which, after the not wholly beneficent example of her elders and betters, could be measured out by the long hundred without much difficulty.v] L.E.L. MrsHemans. SaraColeridge 127 But, a great many more are those short poems which, except under the force of some extraordinary inspiration such as she hardly ever enjoyed, take a long time and the vital power of a long time to bring to perfection. There is little evidence of any such accumulation and expenditure of poetic energy on her part. The greatest thing she did, England's Dead-her most original, her most thoughtfullacks consummateness and inevitableness of expression, either in the splendid, or in the simple, style. Casabianca is less unequal in itself, but is on a lower level; and, so far as expression goes, the equally wellknown Better Land is lower still, though it is excellent milk well crumbled with good bread for babes. They grew in beauty side by side has the same quality, which one is reluctant to depreciate or ridicule, but which certainly excites more esteem than enthusiasm. It takes the sea and death, two of the very few motives which never fail to draw poetry out of any soul that has poetry in it, to bring her subject and her expression to a fairly equal level inWhat hid'st thou in thy treasure caves and cells? Leaves have their time to fall, etc. Now, the soul of Mrs Hemans was a poetic soul, but it was not a strong one and it failed to follow steadily what star it had. The 'unfulfilled renown' which Sara Coleridge won with Phantasmion-and which would have been almost certainly fulfilled, had she sacrificed less of her time and energies to the piety of putting some order into the chaos of her father's 'remains'was derived not least from the verse with which that pleasant book is sprinkled. This bears, like her brother Hartley's, a curious sense of incompleteness about it; its grace and perfume and suggestive melody seem to be but half-born. One face alone is worthy of not the least of the Caroline poets, and so is False Love, too long thou hast delayed. The brief and strong defence of 'the fairy way of writing,' in the Envoy, deserves to be much more widely known than it is. But most of the songs are in undertones. They have, however, an air of suppressed power which is absent from those of her amiable and excellent step-aunt. Caroline Bowles, though no relation to the author of the half-accidentally famous sonnets, and much less voluminous, was, as a poetess, very much what he was as a poet. Her little verses are neither pretentious nor silly; the sentiment has hardly anything that is mawkish and still less that is rancid about it; but it is only the cowslip wine of poetry. It is unfortunate that not merely the general subject, but one or two128

Lesser Poets, 1790-1837

[CH.

internal touches of her Mariner's Hymn may make some readers think of Christina Rossetti's incomparably superior Sleep at Sea; but there is no real connection between them, and The Mariner's Hymn deserves its own not too low place. The most interesting groups which the subject of this chapter offers have been noticed; but, before we come to individuals, some of whom, also, are interesting, one or two other batches of minor bards may be dealt with. For traditional dignity of form, though certainly for little other merit, a small band of professed epic writers may have precedence, and they may themselves be as properly headed by the laureate for nearly a quarter of a century, Henry James Pye, who crowned the efforts in all sorts of verse which he made during close on that time-prize poems and Pindaric odes, verse-essays on beauty and ballooning, and the dreadful duty ditties of his post-with an Alfred in six books of technically faultless, but poetically null, eighteenth century couplets. Pye, though a convenient butt for the usual anti-laureate jokes, was, in fact, not so much a bad poet as no poet at all1. He was not specially rhetorical, or specially silly, or specially extravagant, or ridiculously sentimental and pseudoromantic. His house was the house of typically eighteenth century verse, empty and swept of all poetical life, not even garnished by any poetical stuff, not inhabited by devils at all-but simply empty. He is thus an interesting figure in a historical museum of the subject. Not very much Pye's junior was William Sotheby, a friend of Scott and other good men, and, apparently, quite a good man himself; but one who certainly ran his neck into danger of, if he did not fully deserve, the gibbeting which befell another poetaster by epics, dramas, translations, odes and everything that readers of poetry could wish or not wish. Edwin Atherstone may be not unfairly called the Blackmore of the nineteenth century, with his Fall of Nineveh, in thirty books, and others to suit, besides prose romances. A certain grandiosity may, perhaps, be allowed him; as, also, to the still younger, but even more long-lived, John Abraham Heraud (Thackeray's not unkindly 1 As a prose writer, Pye was far from contemptible. He had a fancy for commentaries and summaries. His Summary of the Duties of a J.P. (he was himself Bow street magistrate) was found useful, but hardly concerns us here. His Commentary on Shakespeare's commentators, and that appended to his translation of the Poetics, contain some noteworthy matter. A man, who, born in 1745, could write ' Sir Charles Grandison is a much more unnatural character than Caliban,' may have been a poetaster but was certainly not a fool.v] Epic Writers. Polok and R. Montgomery 129 treated original of 'Jawbrahim Heraudee'). It is doubtful whether anyone living can boast of having read Atherstone and Heraud through; but they might be more preferable to the galleys than the shorter and not uncommonly read work of Robert Pollok, who, having barely thirty years of life to set against their eighty or ninety, might, perhaps, have equalled them in production had he lived. His youth, his profession (he was a licentiate of one of the sectarian churches in Scotland), his ill-health, his early death and so forth, together with the exceptional propriety in sentiment of The Course of Time, have secured not merely reading, but some professions of admiration for it. But the only thing that can sustain attention to its ponderous commonplace and gradus decorations is a search for the fine things that have been discovered in it. A conscientious enquirer must clearly read it through in this quest; if he is not more fortunate than the present writer, he will reach the end without having found them. In fact, if anyone cared to do so, it would be as easy as it would be cruel and unnecessary to treat Pollok as Macaulay treated his immediate successor, Robert Montgomery (born Gomery). But the thing has already been done, in the case of The Omnipresence of the Deity and Satan, once for all, and by no means so unfairly as it is sometimes the fashion to say now. There are passages in both Pollok and Montgomery which a hasty, forgetful, or, perhaps, actually not very wellread, person might take for poetry. But, in no case will any real originality, either of substance or of expression, be found; nor is there, in either versifier, the slightest approach to that technical excellence which, whether it be ever a supreme positive quality or not, certainly covers a multitude of minor defects. Nor, finally, is there, in either, that suggestion of something better -that aura of unachieved success-for which full (some may think too full) allowance is made here. After swans, wrens; though the specific quality, not very excellent in either case, is, perhaps, a little better in the smaller birds. It was impossible that the remarkable achievement, and still more the immense popularity, of Moore should not produce a large following of imitators, for most of whom the 'twitter' which was protested against above in his case is scarcely an injurious term. Of writers already noticed, as has been frankly confessed, there are touches of it even in Hood and Praed, much more in others; while it is strong in L. E. L., and not weak in Mrs Hemans. It is difficult to put Bryan Waller Procter ('Barry Cornwall') in

E. L. XII. CH. V.

9130

Lesser Poets, 7 90 1837

[CH.

any higher group than this, though the allocation may surprise some readers. Procter's great personal popularity; his long life (during the latter part of which he wisely did nothing to compete with the far greater poets who had arisen since his early days, and provoked no enquiry into the grounds of his former acceptance), and some domestic accidents connected with the character of his wife and the talents of his daughter, saved him alike from total forgetfulness, and from the unpleasant revulsion or revolution which death often brings upon a man's fame. He was very well read, and had had the wits and taste to catch up beautiful old rhythms. He would sometimes mould pretty things on them, as in Sit down, sad soul and the Song for Twilight. But, anyone who wishes not to disturb the pleasant atmosphere of praise and affection which has been raised round Procter by great writers from Lamb to Swinburne had better not explore the context of the still vaguely known lines The sea! the sea! the open sea! The blue, the fresh, the ever free! which Ethel Newcome most excusably quoted. Nor, with Moore to go to, do we want things like O! the summer night Has a smile of light, And she sits on a sapphire throne. The much more hardly used Thomas Haynes Bayly, to some extent, deserved the ridicule which has fallen on him, by indulgences in positive silliness, and by faults of taste which Procter never could have committed. Nobody can have done more to bring 'the drawing-room ballad' into the contempt from which it has never fully emerged than Bayly did by his effusions. Even now, when we seldom mention them, and the songs themselves are never heard, their names are, in a way, familiar, if only contemptuously so. Perhaps, contempt might be qualified by a little affection if they were more read, for there is pathos and (independently of the famous composers who 'set' him) music in Bayly. But it is too often, if not invariably, frittered away. And it may be specially noted that there is hardly any easier and completer method of appreciating that undefinable mixture of breeding and scholarship with which Praed has been credited above than by comparing the pretty numerous pieces in which Bayly either directly imitates, or unconsciously coincides with, Praed's society-verse style.v]

Bloomfield and Clare

3 I

Perhaps the position of the most twittering of all the twitterers has been wrongly assigned to William Robert Spencer, of whom both Scott and Byron thought well, and who, at least, was a translator of some merit. And the pathetic end of Laman Blanchard, celebrated and mourned by Bulwer and by Thackeray (Johnstone and Maxwell agreeing for once!), neither makes nor mars his rank as, perhaps, the best of this bunch-a lesser Hood, both in serious and light verse, but with the same combination of faculties, and with a skill in the sonnet which Hood more seldom showed. Community of circumstance, of misfortune and (in part) of subject has linked Robert Bloomfield and John Clare together. Both, though Bloomfield was not 'tied to the soil' by birth, were agricultural labourers, or, as Bloomfield's own much better phrase has it, 'farmers' boys'; both made themselves authors under the consequential difficulties; both were patronised; neither made the best use of the patronage; and both died mad, though, in Bloomfield's case, actual insanity has been questioned. Nor is there quite so much dissimilarity between the poetic value of their work, if the poems of Clare published during his lifetime be taken alone, as readers of the high, and not ill-deserved, praise sometimes bestowed on the younger poet might expect. The late Sir Leslie Stephen, indeed, took a low view of Clare's production as a whole; but 'asylum verses' were not the kind of poetry that generally appealed to that accomplished critic. They certainly distinguish Clare from Bloomfield, from whom even madness or approach to madness did not extract anything better than a sort of modernising of Thomson, most creditable as produced under difficulties and entitled to the further consideration that, when he first produced it, the newer poetry had hardly begun to appear, and that nothing but eighteenth century echoes could possibly be expected. Charles Lamb, who never went wrong without good cause, and who, on no occasion, was an unamiably 'superior' critic, thought that Bloomfield had 'a poor mind,' and there is certainly nothing in his work to indicate that it was a rich one, poetically speaking. Lamb put Clare higher, even on the work he knew, and his judgment was eventually justified; but it may be questioned whether the appeal of the volumes on which he formed it is, except in technique, much higher than Bloomfield's. As was certain to be the case in 1820, as compared with 1800, the stock couplet versification and diction of the eighteenth century are replaced by varied metres, 9-2132

Lesser Poets, 1790-1837

[CH.

a more natural vocabulary, and a general attempt at lyrical quality. The sense of the country may not be more genuine in Clare than in his elder, but it is more genuinely expressed; still, there is constant imitation, not merely of Goldsmith and Thomson, Beattie and Shenstone, but of Cowper and Burns, and, save now and then (The Last of March is a favourable instance), nature is not very freshly seenl. Yet, even in these early poems, the sonnets, with that strange magic of the form which has often brought out of poets the best that was in them, contain poetic signs which are nowhere to be found in Bloomfield, and the poems written during the miserable later years-for Clare, unlike many luckier lunatics, was not only mad but miserable in his madness-confirm these signs almost as well as could be expected. The wonderful late lines I am-yet what I am, who cares or knows?one of the greatest justifications of Waller's master stroke as to The soul's dark cottage, battered and decayedare, indeed, far above anything else that Clare ever wrote, but they show what he might have written. And other poems2 among these sad waifs exhibit, with greater art, the truthfulness of that 'country sense' to which he had been unable to give full poetic expression earlier. No such results of suffering will be found in Bloomfield's songs, which he continued to publish up to the year before his death. For nature had made him only a versifier; while she made Clare a poet. In passing from groups or batches to individuals, an accidental link to the last-mentioned writer, in madness and in sonnet writing, may be found in a curious person, who, like others, owes his survival in literary history to Southey, and who might, perhaps, have been dealt with in the last volume. Among the 'disdained and forgotten' ones who were included in Specimens of Later English Poetry, was John Bampfylde, a member of one of the best Devonshire families, a Cambridge man and a suitor of Reynolds's niece Miss Palmer, who figures 1 It has been suggested, and is not improbable, that the early volumes were tampered with, and 'prettified' generally, by the publishers; of course, with the best intentions. 2 Known only from the Life by Cherry; but reproduced, in part, by Palgrave, Gale and Symons in selections. Clare seems to have left voluminous manuscripts, but their existence and whereabouts are, largely, unknown. The suspicions of 'tinkering' referred to above make a complete and thoroughly authenticated edition very desirable.v] Barmpfylde and Ley den 33 often in Madame d'Arblay's Diary and in other books of the Johnsonian library. Bampfylde led an unhappy and disorderly life, and died mad; but, a decade before Bowles, he had published a tiny volume of sonnets, two of which Southey reprinted as 'among the most original in English,' with a couple of other pieces from manuscript. The phrase 'original' would seem to have attracted surprise from some of the very few persons who have dealt with Bampfylde; but Southey was not wont to use words lightly, and it is clear what he meant. Except for Warton (who was a friend of Bampfylde, was made the subject of one of his sonnets and was clearly his host at a dinner1 at Trinity, Oxford, which forms the subject of another), there were few sonneteers in 1779, and Bampfylde may well share some of the praise which has been given to Bowles, as an 'origin.' His own language is frankly Miltonic ('Tuscan air' actually appears in the Trinity piece), but the greater number of his sonnets are entitled Evening, Morning, The Sea, Country enjoyment and so forth, and the opening of the poem To the River Teign, first printed by Southey, though classicised (after Milton and Gray) in diction, does not ill carry out the latter poet's example (in his letters if not in his poems) of direct attention to actual 'vales and streams.' Of an older birth date, too, than most of his companions in the present chapter, though not than Mrs Barbauld, Rogers, or Pye, was the muchtravelled, many-languaged, many-friended and many-scienced, but short-lived and eccentric John Leyden. Leyden's ballads, especially The Mermaid, have been highly praised, but a truthful historic estimate must class them with the hybrid experiments numerous between Percy's Reliques and The Ancient Mariner and not completely avoided even by Scott himself, Leyden's great friend and panegyrist, at the opening of his career. Of his longer poems, Scenes of Infancy and others, few except partial judges have recently had much good to say. There remain some dozen or half score of individual poets, who are, most of them, more definitely of the transitional character which pervades this chapter, and who, while illustrating, in different respects and degrees, the general characteristics which will be set forth at its close, neither exhibit any special community with each other nor possess power 1 After dinner, 'Phyllis and Chloe' came in. The frequentation of college rooms by ladies was certainly not so frequent then as now, but the sonneteer takes pains to tell us that everything was strictly proper.I34

Lesser Poets, 790-18 3 7

[CH.

sufficient to entitle them to long separate notice. If any demur is made to this last sentence, it would probably be in the cases of the western poets, both of them in Anglican orders, Robert Stephen Hawker and William Barnes. Of these, Hawker, at least, would seem to have had fire enough in him to have made him a much greater poet than he was. He was old enough to belong to the days of literary mystification, and his best known poem, the Song of the Western Men, though quite original except its refrain1, took in, as a genuine antique, not merely Dickens, which is not surprising, but Scott and Macaulay, which is. There is, however, nothing in the filling up of this poem which scores of other pens might not have written. The Silent Tower of Bottreau, sometimes called The Bells of Bottreacux, is very much more of a diploma piece, and, perhaps, Queen Gwennyvar's Round ('Naiad for Grecian Waters') would, if one word were altered, be the best of all. But Pater Vester Pascit illa, The Sea Bird's Cry, all the special Morwenna poems (referring to the patron saint of his remote and beautiful parish Morwenstow) and not a few others of the shorter pieces have no common poetry in them. Hawker was old when he was 'induced' (a rather ominous word) to commit to writing a long poem, which he had thought of for years, entitled The Quest of the Sangraal; and he only wrote one complete book or 'chant' of it. But the fragment shows promise of original treatment; and its blank verse is full of vigour and independence. In order to put Barnes satisfactorily in his place, a longer discussion of dialect poetry than would here be fitting is almost necessary, and some notice, at least, of the curious philological craze, by which, following in the distant footsteps of Reginald Pecock, he would have revolutionised the English language by barring Latin compounds and abstractions, might not be superfluous. But it must suffice to say that, in his case more than in most others, acceptance or rejection (at least polite laying aside) as a whole is necessary. No single piece of Barnes, one can make bold to say, is possessed of such intrinsic poetical quality that, like the great documents of Burns, it neither requires the attractions of dialect to conciliate affection, nor is prevented from exciting disgust by the repulsion of dialect. All alike are permeated by pleasant and genuine perception of country charms2; 1 'And shall Trelawney die?' etc. 2 In this respect, they are only rivalled by Clare's and, necessarily, are of happier tone.v] Barton. James Montgomery. Elliott 135 by not unpleasant and genuine sentiment of a perfectly manly kind and by other good qualities of general literature. The verse is fluent and musical enough; the diction neither too 'aureate,' nor too 'vulgar,' nor too much loaded with actually dialectic words. Whether, in the absence of special poetic intensity and idiosyncrasy, the vesture of dialectic form repels or attracts, so as to procure rejection, or so as to deserve acceptance, of the 'middle kind of poetry' offered, must depend to such a degree upon individual taste that it seems unnecessary to speak positively or copiously on the question. Some verse-writers of earlier date, and, at one time or another, of wider appeal, may now be mentioned, though they need not occupy us long. The quaker poet Bernard Barton has so many pleasant and certainly lasting literary associations-the friendship of Lamb and of Southey and of FitzGerald, the presentation of Byron in his most sensible, good-natured and un-Satanic aspect, and, in fact, numerous other evidences of his having possessed the rare and precious qualities which 'please many a man and never vex one'-that it would be a pity if anyone (except at the call of duty) ran the risk of vexation by reading his verse. He wrote, it is said, ten volumes of it, and there is no apparent reason, in what the present writer has read of them, why he or any man should not have written a hundred such, if he had had the time. Some of his hymns are among his least insignificant work. The same is the case with James Montgomery, whom we might have mentioned with his unlucky namesake in the longpoem division, for he wrote several epics or quasi-epics, which were popular enough, entirely negligible, but not absurd. Some of his hymns, also, such as Go to dark Gethsemane, Songs of praise the angels sang and others, are still popular and not negligible, while he could sometimes, also, write verses (not technically 'sacred,' but devoted to the affections and moral feelings) which deserve some esteem. James Montgomery is one of the poets who have no irrefragable reason for existing, but whom, as existing, it is unnecessary to visit with any very damnatory sentence. The condition of Ebenezer Elliott is different. He had much more poetical quality than Montgomery, and very much more than Barton, but he chose, too frequently, to employ it in ways which make the enjoyment of his poetry somewhat difficult. A man is not necessarily the worse, any more than he is the better, poet for136

Lesser Poets, 1790-1837

[CH.

being 'a Corn Law Rhymer,' whether his riming takes the form of defence or, as in Elliott's case, of denunciation. Dryden and Canning are not unpalatable to intelligent liberals, nor Shelley and Moore, in their political poems, to intelligent tories. But Elliott seldom (he did sometimes, as in his Battle Song) put enough pure poetic fire in his verse to burn up, or to convert into clear poetic blaze, the rubbish of partisan abuse which feeds his furnace. Still, he does, in this and one or two other instances even of the political poems, establish his claim, which is fortunately reinforced by a not inconsiderable number of poems sometimes lyrical, sometimes in other form, where a real love of nature finds expression in really poetic numbers. He began to write before the end of the eighteenth century, and, therefore, naturally enough, echoed Thomson and Crabbe for some time; but Southey, that Providence of poetical sparrows, took him in hand, and Elliott's later and better verse shows no copying, either of Southey himself or of any of the greater new poets, only a beneficial influence of the new poetry itself. In few, if any, instances do locality and environment provide more stimulating contrast than in the case of Sheffield (Elliott's abode) and its neighbourhood; and it is fair to say that, in very few instances, has a poet, not of the absolutely first class, taken better advantage of this opportunity. In writing of another and, in a way, the most famous of Southey's protdg6s, Henry Kirke White, one has to remember not merely that 'Clio is a Muse,' but that, unlike some of her sisters, she has the duty of a female Minos or Rhadamanthus cast upon her. A very good young man, possessed of sound literary instincts, dying young, after a life not exactly unfortunate or unhappy, but, until nearly the last, not quite congenial and blameless always, he has been duly embalmed in two different but precious kinds of amber-Southey's perfect prose and Byron's fine verse-rhetoric. His biographer's private letters to White's brother increase the interest and sympathy which one is prepared to extend to the subject of so much good nature and good writing from such strikingly different quarters. But it is really impossible, after soberly reading Kirke White's actual performances, to regard him-to quote Shelley once moreas even a competitor for the inheritance of unfulfilled renown. A hymn or two-The Star of Bethlehem and the (in modern hymnals) much altered Oft in danger, oft in woe-some smooth eighteenth century couplets and a prettyish lyric or so on non-sacred subjects are the best things that stand to his credit. It is, of course, perfectly true that he died at twenty, and that, at twenty,v]

Kirke ffhite. Cary

I37

many great poets have done little or not at all better. But, to draw any reasonable probability of real poetry in future from this fact requires a logic and a calculus which the literary historian should respectfully decline to practise. For, if the fact of not having written good poetry up to the age of twenty were sufficient to constitute a claim to poetical rank, mankind at large might claim that position; and, even if the fact of the claim were limited to having actually written bad or indifferent verse before that age, the Corpus Poetarum would be insupportably enlarged. It is no small relief to turn from indifferent performance and undiscoverable promise to something, and that no small thing, not merely attempted but definitely done. Henry Francis Cary wrote some prose sketches of poets, not without merit, in continuation or imitation of Johnson's Lives; and was a translator on a large scale; but one of his efforts in this latter difficult and too often thankless business has secured him the place (and, again, it is no scanty or obscure one) which he occupies in English literature. It may be impossible to translate Dante into English verse after a fashion even nearly so satisfactory to those who can read the Italian poet, and who can estimate English poetry, as is the prose of J. A. Carlyle and A. J. Butler. But it may be very seriously doubted whether, of the innumerable attempts in verse up to the present day, any is so satisfactory to a jury composed of persons who answer to the just given specifications as Cary's blank verse. It is, no doubt, in a certain sense, a 'refusal'; but it is not in the least, in the sense of the famous passage of its original, a rfiuto. It is, on the contrary, a courageous, scholarly and almost fully justified recognition that attempts directly to conquer the difficulty by adopting rimed terza rima are doomed to failure; and that all others, in stanza or rimed verse of any kind, are evasions to begin with, and almost as certain failures to boot. It may even be said to be a further, and a very largely successful, recognition of the fact that blank verse, while 'nearest prose' in one sense, and, therefore, sharing its advantages, is almost furthest from it in another, in the peculiar qualities of rhythm which it demands. Cary does not quite come up to this latter requisition, but, unless Milton had translated Dante, nobody could have done so. Aeanwhile, Cary's verse translation has gone the furthest and come the nearest. It is no slight achievement. Two names famous in their way remain to be dealt with and the dealing may with both, as with Cary, be pleasant. Probably no 6 single-speech' poet has attracted more attention and has beenI38

Lesser Poets, 1790 1837

[CH.

the subject of more writing than Charles Wolfe, several times questioned but quite unquestionable author of The Burial of Sir John Moore. The thing is one of those 'windfalls of the muses' for which one can only give the muses thanks. That it seems to have been originally a metrical paraphrase from Southey's admirable prose account of the facts in The Annual Register is not in the least against it; that, not merely the at once flaming and triumphant patriotism of the time (1817) but all competent judgment since has accepted it as one of the very best things of the kind is conclusive. It has been parodied not merely in one famous instance by Barham, but again and again; it was made the subject of a most ingenious mystification by father Prout; it may be cavilled at by merely pedantic criticism as facile, sentimental, claptrap and what not. But its facility is the facility of at least temporary inspiration; its sentiment is of the sunt lacrimae rerum and of no meaner description; if it appeals for the plaudite, it is to those whose applause is worth having. It has the rush and sweep of Campbell (no less a person than Shelley thought it might be his) without Campbell's occasional flaws. There is no doubt about it. But, when amiable persons, founding their belief on some amiable things (To Mary and so forth) which are included among Wolfe's Remains, suggest that we lost a major poet by Wolfe's death in consumption at the age of thirty-two, it is best to let the reply be silence. On the other hand, there are reasons for thinking that, if Reginald Heber, bishop of Calcutta, had devoted himself entirely to letters, he might have been a poet, if not exactly of first rank, at least very high in the second. He has no 'rocket' piece like Wolfe's Burial. But, though he died at forty-three, and, for the last twenty years of his life, laboured faithfully at clerical work (latterly of the most absorbing kind), he showed a range and variety of talent in verse which should have taken him far. The story is well known how, during a visit of Scott to Oxford, Heber added impromptu on a remark from Sir Walter1 the best lines of the rather famous Newdigate which he was about to recite. He added to hymnology some dozen of the best and best known attempts in that difficult art below its few masterpieces. He could write serio-comic verse in a fashion which suggests not imitation, but, in some cases, anticipation, of Moore, Praed and Barham at once. The Spenserians of his Morte d'Arthur need only to have been taken a little more seriously to be excellent; and the 1 But it was before his baronetcy.v]

Heber

I39

charming lines to his wife (If thou wert by my side, my love) in the late Indian days, unpretentious and homely as they are, remind one of the best side of the eighteenth century in that vein as shown in Lewis's Winifreda. For there was still a considerable eighteenth century touch in Heber; and the fact may conveniently introduce the few general remarks which have been promised to end this chapter. It is safe to say that all the poets here dealt with-major, minor, or minim, in their own division-display, not merely in a fanciful chronological classification but in real fact, the transition character which is very important to the historical student of literature, and very interesting to the reader of poetry who does not wilfully choose to shut his ears and eyes to it. Some, to use the old figure, are Januses of the backward face only; or with but a contorted and casual vision forwards. Hardly one can be said to look steadily ahead, though, in the group to which particular attention has been devoted (that of Hood, Darley, Beddoes and others), the forward velleity, however embarrassed and unknowing, is clear. Their struggle does not avail much, but it avails something. In yet others, new kinds of subject, and even of outward form, effect an alteration which their treatment hardly keeps up. Another point connected with this general aspect and itself of some importance for the general study of literary history is thisthat, despite individual tendencies to imitation, all these poets show a general air as of sheep without a shepherd. They have-except Rogers, Bloomfield and one or two more among the minors and Campbell as a kind of major in a half vain recalcitrance-lost the catchwords and guiding rules of eighteenth century poetry, and they have not fully discovered those of the nineteenth. Even their elder contemporaries, from Wordsworth downwards, were fully comprehended by few of them; Shelley and Keats only dawn upon the youngest and not fully even on them. Now, it has sometimes been asserted that the complete dominance of any poet, poets or style of poetry is a drawback to poetic progress; and particular applications have been suggested in the case of the long ascendency of Tennyson in the middle and later nineteenth century. A comparison of the range of lesser poetry, as we have surveyed it, between 1800 and 1835, with that which appeared between 1840 and 1880, is not very likely to bear out this suggestion.CHAPTER VI

REVIEWS AND MAGAZINES IN THE EARLY YEARS OF THE NINETEENTH CENTURY BEFORE the opening of the nineteenth century, the periodical review, such as we now know it, can hardly be said to have achieved a permanent place in general literature. There had, nevertheless, for a considerable time, been in existence periodical publications under the names reviews or magazines which served partly as chronicles, or records, or registers of past events, which conveyed information and which opened their pages, more or less, to original contributions of poetry and prose. The Gentleman's Monthly Magazine, founded in 1731, lived till 1868. It was rather in short-lived newspaper sheets, such as The Tatler and The Spectator, in the early days of the eighteenth century, and in their successors founded on the same lines, that (as has been shown in an earlier volume of this work) are to be found any adumbrations of the periodical essay and of the periodical fiction which formed the bulk of the reviews and magazines of a later date. In cases such as these, an author or authors of eminence had found the means of addressing the general public. Apart from them, the publication had no separate existence of its own, and, of course, it came to an end when they ceased to write. At the end of the eighteenth century, however, when political thoughts were stirring in men's minds, various magazines and reviews intended to promote sectional and party objects-high church, evangelical, tory, whig and extremist-sprang up and had a short life; but none of them achieved any authoritative position in the estimation of the general public. Between the review and the magazine there was a very real distinction, and, though there has been a tendency on the part of each to borrow occasionally the special characteristics of the other, it has never been wholly left out of sight. The review made it its business to discuss works of literature, art and science, to consider national policy and public events, to enlighten its readersCH. VI]

The Edinburgh Review

I41

upon these subjects and to award praise or censure to authors and statesmen. It did not publish original matter, but confined itself to commenting upon or criticising the works and doings of others. Its articles professed to be the serious consideration of specified books, or of parliamentary or other speeches of public men. They were not, at least in form, independent and original studies. Even Macaulay's brilliant biographical essays appeared in The Edinburgh Review in the form of literary criticisms of books whose titles served him as the pegs upon which to hang his own study of the life and work of some great historical figure. The magazine, on the other hand, was a miscellany. Though it contained reviews and criticisms of books, it did not confine itself to reviewing. To its pages, authors and poets sent original contributions. It admitted correspondence from the outside world; and it aimed at the entertainment of its readers rather than at the advocacy of views. Through the instrumentality of the magazine, much valuable and permanent literary matter first came before the public. In the first quarter of the nineteenth century, the two great reviews-The Edinburgh and The Quarterly-and two brilliant magazines-Blackwood's and The London-sprang to life, and, on the whole, they have conformed to the original distinctions of type. With these reviews and magazines and their many imitators, a substantially new form was originated and developed in which literature of a high class was to find its opportunities. An aspiring author, in this way, might, and did, obtain a hearing without undergoing the risk and expense of publishing a book or a pamphlet. From the reception given to the new reviews, it is clear that, on the part of the general community, an intellectual thirst, once confined to the very few, was now keenly felt. Men wanted to know about books, and events, and to find them discussed; yet, till the eighteenth century had struck, it is hardly too much to say that able, honest and independent literary criticism was unknown. The spurious criticism of periodicals, notoriously kept alive by publishers to promote the sale of their own books, was, virtually, all that existed. In all these respects, a great and momentous change was at hand. The system of anonymous reviewing in periodicals under the guidance and control of responsible editors, themselves men of strong individuality, soon led to the review acquiring a distinct personality of its own. By ninety-nine out of every hundred readers, the criticism expressed would be accepted as that of the142

Reviews and M agazines

[CH.

review-of The Edinburgh or The Quarterly-and they would enquire no further. Among regular contributors, as, of course, with the editor, the feeling prevailed that articles in the review represented something more than the opinion, at the moment, of the individual writer. They were intended, in some sort, to give expression to the views of able and intelligent men who, generally speaking, had the same outlook on public affairs. Naturally, some contributors would gravitate towards Jeffrey and The Edinburgh, whilst others would turn to Gifford and The Quarterly. Without the practice of anonymity, combined with responsible and vigorous editorship, a lasting corporate personality could not have been acquired; and the chief reviews, though they would still have fulfilled a useful purpose, could not have become influential organs of public opinion. The issue, in October 1802, of the first number of The Edinburgh Review and Critical Journal, published by Constable of Edinburgh and Longman and Rees of London, was an event of great significance, making a new departure in literary criticism, and opening a pathway, much trodden since, whereby men of ability and independence, of learning and of practical knowledge, have been enabled to render services to their countrymen and to literature, which it would be difficult to overestimate. To enlighten the mind of the public, and to guide its judgments in matters of literature, science and art, was the aspiration of the early Edinburgh reviewers; and, at the same time, in the region of politics, to promote what seemed to them to be a more liberal and popular system of government. The name chosen for this contemplated organ of opinion was not new. Nearly half a century earlier, an Edinburgh Review, 'to be published every six months,' had made its appearance. It was to give some account of all books published in Scotland in the preceding half year, and of the most remarkable books published in England and elsewhere in the same period. In its anonymous pages, Robertson (afterwards principal Robertson), Adam Smith and Alexander Wedderburn (afterwards lord chancellor Loughborough) first made their appearance in print; but, notwithstanding the eminent ability of its contributors, The Edinbuirgh Review of 1755 lived through only two numbers, its liberal tone, in matters of philosophy, and in matters considered to trench on theology, proving distasteful to the prevailing narrow orthodoxy of that day1. 1 The Edinburgh Review for the year 1755, 2nd edition with preface, 1818.VI]

The Edinburgh Review

I43

The Edinburgh Review, 'to be continued quarterly,' of 1802, which was to become famous and permanent as an exponent of literary and political criticism, abandoned the idea of noticing all the productions of the press, and proposed to confine its attentions to the most important. The new journal, it was hoped, would be 'distinguished for the selection rather than for the number of its articles'.' To three young men, then quite unknown to fame, belongs the honour of originating The Edinburgh Review, and of winning for it its high place in English literature, namely-Francis Jeffrey, a Scottish advocate, still almost briefless, who had been educated at the universities of Glasgow and Oxford; Sydney Smith, a distinguished Wykehamist and Oxonian, who, while waiting for an English living, was in Edinburgh as the private tutor of young Michael Hicks Beach, then attending classes in the university; and Henry Brougham, the future lord chancellor, who had only lately been called to the Scottish bar, and who, with abundant leisure, was, like Jeffrey, still treading the floor of the parliament house. The history of the birth and early years of The Edinburgh is well known. Nothing of the kind, with the exception of the discouraging precedent already mentioned, had ever been attempted in Scotland. It was easy to say on the title page of the first number that it was 'to be continued quarterly'; yet, Jeffrey himself, who was to edit the Review for the next seven and twenty years, was full of anxiety as to whether it would pay its expenses for the one year for which he and his friends had bound themselves to the publishers. His apprehensions were quickly dispelled. By all accounts, the effect on the public mind of the appearance of the first number (10 October 1802) was 'electrical.' The little literary criticism then existing was lifeless-mere hackwork, subsidised by publishers to puff their own wares. Here was a review showing upon every page, whether the reader agreed with, or differed from, its expressions of opinion, conspicuous ability, vigour and independence. Succeeding numbers added to the popularity and the fame of The Edinburgh. In half-a-dozen years, its circulation rose from 800 to 9000; in ten years, it had grown to about 10,000; and, by 1818, it had attained a circulation of nearly 14,000, which was never exceeded. Even these figures do not show the number of copies ultimately bought by the public, for each volume (containing two numbers) had 'a book value'; and many volumes ran through a large number of editions. For 1 See advertisement to the first number of The Edinburgh Review, October 1802.I44

Reviews and Magazines

[CH.

example, in the years 1814 and 1815, there were published the tenth and seventh editions of volume I and volume II respectively. The first number contained no fewer than 29 articles, and 252 pages. Nine articles were written by Sydney Smith, six by Jeffrey, four by Francis Horner, three by Brougham and others by Thomson, Murray and Hamilton. Some of the contributions were so short that they were rather notices of books than serious and critical reviews. During the first three years, the list of contributors was increased by the names of Walter Scott, Playfair, John Allen, George Ellis, Henry Hallam and others. Jeffrey and his friends did not long maintain their original intention of declining all remuneration for their contributions; and only the first two numbers were written without reward. As a matter of fact, Sydney Smith had edited the first number; and he quickly saw that, if permanency was sought, the Review would have to be conducted on business principles. Thus, he assured Constable the publisher that a payment of ~200 a year to the editor and ten guineas a sheet for contributions would render him the possessor of 'the best Review in Europe.' The system of 'all gentlemen and no pay' thus quickly came to an end, for, though the publisher considered the rate of pay suggested was unprecedented, he recognised that so, too, was the success of the Review, and, in later days, it was very largely increased. In the twentieth century, it is not easy to understand the coyness with which, a hundred years ago, men accepted payment for literary services. Jeffrey, who became editor under the new arrangement, satisfied himself by enquiry that none of his men would reject the ~10 honorarium, and, 'under the sanction of their example,' he thought he might himself accept the offered salary 'without being supposed to have suffered any degradation.' The first three or four numbers indicated clearly enough the political and literary tendencies which were to characterise the Review. The first article of all, written by Jeffrey, reviewed a book by Mounier, late president of the French national assembly, on the causes of the revolution. Jeffrey held what were called popular principles, but he was no revolutionist, and he looked forward to the time when men on both sides would be able to take calmer views of that great convulsion than was possible to most Englishmen in 1802. Francis Horner, in later years regarded 1 Jeffrey to Horner, May 1803.vI]

The Edinburgh Review

I45

as one of the greatest authorities on political economy, wrote on 'The Paper Credit of Great Britain,' whilst Brougham discussed 'The Crisis in the Sugar Colonies.' The literary article in the first number-on Southey's Thalaba-indicated the spirit of much of the future literary criticism of the Review. Jeffrey seems anxious to show that the stern motto of The Edinburgh-Judex damnatur cume nocens absolvitur-had, in the eyes of its editor, a very real meaning. Those who look back to the earlier numbers of The Edinburgh will perceive, not without amusement, that nothing so greatly roused the ire of these advanced reformers in the world political as the slightest new departure from ancient ways in the world of letters. Southey, it was urged, was nothing less than 'a champion and apostle' of a new sect of poets. They were all of them dissenters from the established system in poetry and criticism.... Southey is the first of these brought before us for judgment, and we cannot discharge our inquisitorial office conscientiously without pronouncing a few words upon the nature and tendency of the tenets he has helped to propagate. The Review protested against 'the representation of vulgar manners in vulgar language,' and would recall its generation to 'the vigilance and labour which sustained the loftiness of Milton, and gave energy and directness to the pointed and fine propriety of Pope.' The article, however, was by no means entirely condemnatory; but enough has been quoted to show that already the note of battle had been sounded in that long war with the 'lakers' whom, half a generation later, the Review was still denouncing as 'a puling and self-admiring race.' The literary judgments of The Edinburgh Review have, in a large number of instances, not been confirmed by the judgment of posterity. In many other instances, on the other hand, their criticisms have been amply vindicated. Jeffrey and his friends, in short, were not infallible, though they arrogated to themselves an authority hardly less than pontifical. Still, there was always something robust and manly in the tone they adopted. They were men of the world, engaged in the active occupations of life; of wide reading, it is true, and gifted with great literary acumen; but, perhaps, with too little leisure to appreciate contemplative poetry at its true value. They were prone to despise those whom they considered mere penmen and nothing else, and they were exasperated at the notion that any small literary coterie, holding itself aloof from the active world, should lay down laws for the 1 Article on Childe Harold, December 1816.

E. L. XII. CH. VI.

10146

Reviews and Magazines

[CH.

regulation of poetry and taste, and give itself airs of superiority even towards the great masters of the English language. In his later life, Jeffrey, in republishing a selection of his articles in the Review, admits that the manner in which he treated the lake poets was not such as commended itself to his matured judgment and taste. It is not likely that his famous article of 1814 on Wordsworth's Excursion, opening with the words, 'This will never do,' can have been altogether pleasant reading to its author in his old age. There was, however, in Wordsworth's poetry, much for which Jeffrey had always felt and expressed admiration, and he has declared1 that, though he repented of the 'vivacities' of manner in this much censured paper, with the substance of his articles on the poetry of the lake school (taking account of both praise and censure) he had little fault to find. Far the most eminent of Jeffrey's contributors was Walter Scott, for whose patronage, though he had not yet published The Lay of the Last JMinstrel, or written a page of fiction, Scottish and English publishers were eagerly striving. The first number of the second year of The Edinburgh contained two articles from his pen; and, before the end of 1806, he had contributed ten more. Among these were papers on Ellis's Early English Poets, on Godwin's Life of Chaucer, on Chatterton's Works and on Froissart's Chronicles. After that year, he withdrew his countenance and support from The Edinburgh, though, throughout his life, he remained on terms of friendship and intimacy with Jeffrey. Indeed, in 1818, he once more returned to its pages, publishing, in the June number, an elaborate review of a novel by Maturin, Women, or Pour et Contre, a tale by the author of Bertram. It was impossible that hearty cooperation in what was becoming more and more an organ of political party should long continue between the whiggism of Jeffrey, Brougham and Sydney Smith, and the toryism of Walter Scott. The latter had already remonstrated with the editor on the excessive partisanship which now marked every issue of the Review. 'The Edinburgh,' Jeffrey had replied, 'has but two legs to stand on. Literature is one of them, but its right leg is politics.' Next to Jeffrey himself, the Review, from its origin for a quarter of a century onward, was mainly dependent on Sydney Smith and Henry Brougham, each of whom contributed a marvellous number of articles on a vast variety of subjects. Sydney Smith, the only Englishman 1 Jeffrey's Contributions to the Edinburgh Review, vol. in, p. 233.vI]

Brougham

I47

among the founders of the Review, and famous throughout his life as the most brilliant of humourists, knew how to utilise his great gifts in the forwarding of many a good cause and serious reform. Some who delighted in the clever jesting and rollicking high spirits which distinguished him, alike in social intercourse and in the written page, failed to recognise, as did his real intimates, the thoroughness and sincerity of his character, and his genuine desire to leave the world a better place than he found it. Henry Brougham, the youngest of the three, was to become, in a few years and for a time, by dint of extraordinary energy and ability, one of the most powerful political leaders in England. His services to the Review, in its early days, had been quite invaluable. Hardly any public man of the nineteenth century approached more nearly to the possession of genius. But his great gifts were weighted with very serious faults of character and temper; and, as the years went on, he earned for himself universal distrust among his fellow-workers-editors of, and contributors to, The Edinburgh, or statesmen engaged in the wider field of British politics. It was long a tradition among Edinburgh reviewers that, on one occasion, a complete number of the Review, with its dozen or more of articles, was, from cover to cover, written by the pen of Brougham, and the story, whether true or not, is illustrative of the universality of capacity generally attributed to him. Many years afterwards, when Jeffrey had retired from The Edinburgh, Brougham was to make the life of his successor, Macvey Napier, burdensome by persistent efforts to run the Review as his own organ-to make it the instrument of his personal ambitions and interests, of his personal prejudices and dislikes. He did not recognise that times had changed, and that he, and his position in the country, had changed with them. It was an article by Brougham that, in very early days, had brought Byron into the field with his fierce attack upon critics in general and The Edinburgh Review in particular. According to Sir Mountstuart Grant Duff, Brougham, in later days, confessed to the authorship of the article on Hours of Idleness in the January number for 1808-the moving cause of that most brilliant of satires-English Bards and Scotch Reviewers. The poet with equal zeal scourged both his critics and his rivals-indeed, so far as criticism goes, he was as severe on contemporary poets and on 'lakers' as were Edinburgh reviewers themselves. Like them, also, while shaking his head over the poetry of Scott and Wordsworth and Coleridge, he was ready to bow before the 10-2148

Reviews and Magazines

[CH.

poetical genius of Campbell and Rogers. It certainly is a singular circumstance that Jeffrey, by general acknowledgment, in his own day, the first of literary critics, should have made so strange a selection of the poetry which deserved to achieve immortality. A man must serve his time to every trade Save Censure-critics all are ready made. Assuredly, the history of literature abounds with the mistakes of critics. An author, possibly a man of genius, very probably one who has toiled for years to make himself master of his subject, a man whose merits a later age will freely acknowledge, is 'brought up for judgment,' as Jeffrey would say, before some clever writer whose youth and inexperience are hidden from the author and the public by the veil of anonymity. Can hurried judgments so pronounced tend to good results as regards progress in the appreciation of literature and art? On the other hand, all criticism would be at an end if the statesman, the poet, the author, the painter were only to be 'brought up for judgment' before a wiser statesman, a truer poet, a greater author or artist than himself. The experience of the world surely goes to show that any criticism is better than none. It may be that critics are often mistaken; but, so long as criticism is honest and able and independent, it can hardly be that it will not, in the long run, serve a useful purpose in enlightening the public mind. Edinburgh reviewers, in Jeffrey's day, doubtless thought, in their conceit, that it was their business to 'place' contemporary authors and poets, i.e. to determine their claim to immortality and their order of merit for all time in the judgment of the world. And, in this, they often failed. Their true function was, however, not this; but, rather, by their ability and acumen to stir the minds of men on those multifarious subjects with which the Review dealt, to provoke discussion and to enlist in it the most capable men of the day. This work, the great reviews of the early nineteenth century nobly performed. Their criticisms were written for their own age, and dealt, and were intended to deal for the benefit of contemporaries, with passing subjects of interest. As Sir Leslie Stephen has rightly said, 'Criticism is a still more perishable commodity than Poetry1.' Time, and time alone, can establish the claim of any author or of any artist to take rank among the immortals. It was the strong distaste of a large portion of the public, not 1 Half Hours in a Library, 1909 edn, vol. ii, p. 237.VI]

The Quarterly Review

149

for the literary, but for the political, criticisms of The Edinburgh, that, in February 1809, brought a new and most powerful rival into the field. The article on 'Don Cevallos, and the French Usurpation in Spain' was written by Jeffrey himself, and it had, undoubtedly, an exasperating effect on his political opponents. Anyone who chooses to read the article today will probably wonder that this should have been so; and he will certainly not find in it any traces of the unpatriotic feeling with which the writer was charged. The expression of what were considered ' popular sentiments' in days when the French revolution was very recent history was always sure to rouse warm indignation. Lord Buchan, the eccentric elder brother of those eminent whigs Tom1 and Harry1 Erskine, solemnly kicked the offending number of the Review from his hall door into the middle of George street. More sober men, with Walter Scott at the head of them, were genuinely scandalised. It is said, moreover, that the personal hostility of Scott had been stimulated by the article, six months earlier, on Milarmion, which was also written by Jeffrey; though it is probable that it was the poet's worshippers, resenting the disparagement of their hero, rather than the poet himself, who were offended by a review which, while criticising the poem sharply enough in parts and not always wisely, after all placed Scott on a very high pedestal among the great poets of the world. The true causes that brought The Quarterly Review into existence are clear enough. The time had come, and the man, to challenge and dispute vigorously the domination of the great Scottish whig organ. Scott had good reason to fear that whig politics, by its instrumentality, were being disseminated in the most jealously guarded of tory preserves. 'No genteel family,' he writes to George Ellis, 'can pretend to be without the Edinburgh Review; because, independent of its politics, it gives the only valuable literary criticisms that can be met with.' It was, indeed, high time, in the public interest, that the arrogant dictatorship of The Edinburgh, on all subjects literary and political, should be disputed by some able antagonist worthy of its steel. Thus, it happened that The Quarterly, unlike The Edinburgh, was founded with a distinctly political object and by party politicians of high standing, to avert the dangers, threatened by the spread of the doctrines of whigs and reformers, to church and state. The first move had already been made by John Murray the publisher, who, in September 1807, had written to 1 In later days, respectively, lord chancellor and lord advocate.150

Reviews and Magazines

[CH.

Canning that the time was favourable for starting a new political organ. Canning, at that time, made no reply. Now, however, Scott made a strong appeal to Canning and George Ellis and Croker to give their direct assistance to the new venture and to gain for it the countenance and help of other party leaders in London. Scott was himself much pressed to undertake the editorship. This he declined, successfully pressing its acceptance on Gifford, who, with Canning and Ellis, at the end of the century, had been a main supporter of The Anti-Jacobin. 'The real reason,' wrote Scott to Gifford, in October 1808, 'for instituting the new publication is the disgusting and deleterious doctrines with which the most popular of our Reviews disgraces its pages.' But Scott, though a strong tory, could never have become a narrow or servile partisan; and he adjured the new editor to remember that they were fighting for principles they held dear, and against doctrines they disapproved; and that their ends would not be best promoted by mere political subserviency to any administration or party. Indeed, Scott, writing to George Ellis, went so far as to say that he did not wish the projected review to be principally or exclusively political. That might even tend to defeat its purpose. What he wanted was to institute a review in London, conducted totally independent of book-selling influence, on a plan as liberal as that of The Edinburgh, its literature as well supported and its principles English and constitutional1. Scott worked assiduously to make the first number a success, writing himself four articles, making nearly a third of the whole, and recruiting to the standard of The Quarterly, Southey, Kirkpatrick Sharpe, Rogers, Moore and 'others whose reputations Jeffrey had murdered, and who are rising to cry woe upon him, like the ghosts in King Richard2.' Southey, the poet laureate, was a most voluminous contributor, and Gifford suffered much from him for having to compress his essays within the necessary limits, giving, thereby, no little offence to one whom, nevertheless, he regarded as 'the sheet anchor of the Review.' There could be no question from the first as to the ability of the new journal. Yet, its first number (February 1809) met no such reception as had greeted the birth of The Edinburgh. Its tone was literary rather than political. It contained much that was well worth reading, little to dazzle or startle the world. The 1 2 November 1808. 2 Walter Scott to Kirkpatrick Sharpe. See Memoir of John Murray, vol. i, p. 104.vi] Gi ord and Scott 151 publisher was not without anxiety for the future; and his editor Gifford, great as was his literary ability, was certainly one of the least businesslike and most unpunctual of men. The second number was not ready till the end of May, the third till the end of August, when it was found by Ellis (a very candid friend and supporter) to be, 'though profound, notoriously and unequivocally dull.' Murray asserted that The Quarterly was not yet paying its expenses; and it was not till the fourth number (which was some six weeks behind time) that an article appeared which excited general admiration, and which, in the publisher's opinion, largely increased the demand for the Review. This, strangely enough, was an article, and by no means a condemnatory one, on the character of Charles James Fox. Henceforward, the circulation grew steadily, and, in the years 1818 and 1819, when it appears that each of the great reviews reached its maximum circulation, The Edinburgh and The Quarterly sold almost the same number of copies, namely, 14,000. The editorship of Gifford lasted till 1824. During those fifteen years, he wrote few articles himself, but he dealt strenuously with the papers sent him by contributors, in the way of compression, addition and amendment, to the no small dissatisfaction of the writers. It is interesting to know that Jane Austen derived her first real encouragement as a writer of fiction from an article on Emma in The Quarterly by Walter Scott, who remarked with approval on the introduction of a new class of novel, drawing the characters and incidents from the current of ordinary life, as contrasted with the adventures and improbabilities of the old school of romance. Still more interesting is it to be told that Walter Scott himself reviewed Tales of my Landlord in The Quarterly Review for January: 1817, venturing to attribute them to the author of Waverley and Guy Mannering and The Antiquary! Whilst wishing their author every success, he was solemnly warned that he must correct certain very evident defects in his romances if he expected his fame as a writer of fiction to endure. A leading fault in these novels is the total want of interest felt by the reader in the character of the hero. Waverley, Bertram, etc., are all brethren of a family-very amiable and very insipid sort of young men. Few critics are, in truth, so competent to discuss the merits and defects of books as the authors who produce them. Many an author has felt, when reading a criticism of his work, whetherI52

Reviews and Miagazines

[CH.

favourable or the reverse, how much more tellingly he could himself have administered the praise or the blame. The centenary number of The Quarterly Review-April 1909-attributes, no doubt correctly, the concluding laudatory paragraphs of this article, not to Scott himself, but to the editorial activities of Gifford. The two great literary and critical journals had now become the recognised standard-bearers of their respective political parties. Neither entirely excluded from its pages occasional contributions from the opposite camp; but, as a general rule, writers on any subject who were in sympathy with the political objects of liberalism or conservatism rallied respectively to The Edinburgh or The Quarterly Review. As might have been expected, the recognised position that each now held and its close connection with statesmen-the responsible leaders of parties-served to strengthen strict party-ties whilst, perhaps, lessening political independence. As the years went on, the change that had come over the character of The Edinburgh was strongly marked. 'It is odd to hear,' wrote Walter Bagehot in 1855, 'that the Edinburgh Review was once thought an incendiary publication.' After half-a-century of existence, the belief had become general, he says jokingly, that it was written by privy councillors only'. It had long been engaged not only in fighting political conservatism, but in a scarcely less fierce struggle against the extreme men, as it considered those who formed the left wing of the liberal party. In its first half century, Jeffrey and Macaulay were the two men whose character was most deeply impressed both upon the political and literary habits of thought of The Edinburgh Review. It now stood for moderate reform: Macaulay being equally happy in pouring broadsides (1829) into the radical philosophers headed by Bentham and James Mill and their organ The Westminster Review, and in turning his fire, ten years later, against the obscurantist views of the ultra-tory party represented by Gladstone's book on church and state. Contributions, of course, were always anonymous; but there was not, nor could there be, any concealment of the authorship of such papers as Macaulay, for a series of years, sent to the Review -essays which have taken their permanent place in English literature. In many other cases, the veil of anonymity was a thin one. In 1846, just before Lord John Russell formed his

1 Literary Studies, Walter Bagehot, 'The First Edinburgh Reviewers.'VI]

Editors of the Reviews

I53

first administration, the whig orthodoxy of the Review was unimpeachable, as may be seen from the list of subjects and authors in the April number. It was as follows: 1. Parliament and the Courts, by Lord Denman. 2. Shakespeare in Paris, by Mrs Austin. 3. Legislation for the Working Class, by Sir George C. Lewis. 4. The Religious Movement in Germany, by Henry Rogers. 5. Lyall's Travels in North America, by Herman Merivale. 6. European and American State Confederacies, by Nassau Senior. 7. Scottish Criminal Jurisprudence, by Lord Cockburn. 8. The Political State of Prussia, by R. M. Milnes (afterwards Lord Houghton). 9. Earls Grey and Spencer, by Lord John Russell. As regards matters of political, ecclesiastical and religious interest, the tendency of The Edinburgh was consistently in favour of broad and liberal views. Jeffrey and Macaulay, Thomas Arnold, Henry Rogers, Sir James Stephen and, later in the century, Arthur Stanley and Henry Reeve, were among those who, over a long course of years, represented the thoughts and sentiments of the Review. Neither The Edinburgh nor The Quarterly was at any time carried on by what could be called a regular staff. Each was under the control of its editor, who selected his contributors, and made up each number as he thought best. Jeffrey and his successor Macvey Napier held the editorship of The Edinburgh till close upon the middle of the century; while, during the first fifty years of The Quarterly, Gifford and Lockhart ruled, save for the couple of years (1824-6) during which Sir J. T. Coleridge, nephew of the poet, and friend of Keble, occupied the editorial chair. It was not till October 1853 that Lockhart resigned in favour of an old contributor, Whitwell Elwin, the scholarly rector of a parish in Norfolk where he continued to reside. The hot youth of The Quarterly was now a thing of the past. The Edinburgh had ceased to be a firebrand; Maga had long added respectability to its other strong claims upon the public; and, under the new editorship, 'moderation' became the distinguishing mark of The Quarterly. Elwin was a high church rector, but a moderate one; a tory but with whiggish leanings. 'He had not a drop of party feeling in him,' he said of himself in 1854, nor any political antipathies. Literature had been through life 'his first and only love'; and many admirable essays he himself contributed to the Review. His taste, however, had been formed and stereotyped in his youth; and he had little appreciation for rising genius, or anyI54

Reviews and Malgazines

[CH.

inclination to welcome, or even to try to understand, modern thought. ' He could not read,' so The Quarterly centenary article tells us,' Browning or George Eliot, and he thought little of Tennyson. Matthew Arnold, Swinburne, and Rossetti were mere names to him. He knew little and read less of modern French and German authors, and he disliked the Preraphaelite school of painting. He considered Darwinism a wild and discredited hypothesis; he believed in Paley, condemned Ecce Homo, and dismissed the " Higher Criticism" with scorn '; but this lack of appreciation for the sentiments of his own age did not prevent his enjoying the friendship and intimacy of the principal literary and scientific men of his day. Gifford and Lockhart had both been fighting men, who were not open to the reproach (as they would have thought it) of a deficiency of party zeal, or of lukewarmness in their political antipathies. Still, Lockhart, the editor of The Quarterly, was a different man from the Lockhart of the early days of Blackwood. The passing years and the intimate life of Abbotsford had done much to soften and widen the character of the brilliant and mischief-loving freelance of Maga. Andrew Lang has done good service in greatly modifying the severe estimate formed by many of his contemporaries of the character of 'The Scorpion'; and has shown that he possessed a far more generous and more genial temperament than posterity had given him credit for. In the editorial chair, he ruled as a constitutional monarch, advised by his chief ministers Croker and Southey and Barrow2; while Murray himself-the publisher and owner of The Quarterly-took no small part in the direction of its energies. Lockhart's own political instincts were far less inclined to the older toryism than were those of Southey and Croker, to whose vehemence should be mainly ascribed the violent opposition of the Review to catholic emancipation and reform. Doubtless, it was Lockhart's own wiser temperament that led The Quarterly to support the liberal conservatism of the Tamworth manifesto, and to uphold Peel till the general bouleversement of tory politics which followed his repeal of the corn laws. From its very birth, John Wilson Croker, then a young member of parliament, and already a friend of Sir Arthur Wellesley, gave strenuous support to The Quarterly, and, by constant contributions, down to the time of the Crimean war, did much to impress upon it 1 Centenary article, The Quarterly Review, July 1909. 2 Sir John Barrow, for forty years second secretary to the admiralty. He contributed nearly 200 articles to The Quarterly, between 1809 and his death in 1848.vI]

Blackwood's Magazine

I55

his own strong spirit of toryism. It may well be that he does not deserve that reputation for the worst political self-seeking which was the result of Lord Macaulay's vigorous denunciation, and of the fact that it was from Croker that Disraeli, in Coningsby, drew the portrait of Rigby. The Quarterly itself has recently defended him, and not unsuccessfully, against such an extreme charge. That he was a prejudiced, a bitter and a violent, political partisan is beyond dispute. The later political developments of the two great Reviews, however interesting, when W. E. Gladstone was an occasional contributor to The Edinburgh and The Quarterly (his topics being by no means exclusively political), and when Lord Salisbury was lending his brilliant and polemical pen to the conservative cause in The Quarterly, do not concern us here, though they seem to deserve passing mention. The birth and early growth of The Quarterly Review were, as we have seen, the direct result of the political animosities called forth by the reforming, and, as was then considered, the dangerous, doctrines, which, for the previous half dozen years, The Edinburgh had been spreading through the land. The rise of Blackwtood's Magazine was mainly due to a quite different cause, though a conservative or tory spirit (to use the then current expression) animated its principal supporters as strongly as it did those whom Scott and Canning had summoned to the launch of The Quarterly on its distinguished career. Constable was the publisher, not the real founder, of The Edinburgh; Murray stood in the same relation to The Quarterly. But the new magazine which appeared in 1817 was brought into life by the energy, ability and acumen of the spirited publisher whose name it bore. In 1802, The Edinburgh-a new departure in this class of literature-resulted from the association, at that time, in Edinburgh, for the purpose of literary and political criticism, of a group of gifted and ardent and independent young men, none of whom was then known to fame. In 1809, its great rival, The Quarterly, had, in a less adventurous fashion, taken the field. It had behind it, from the beginning, the patronage and support of the leading statesmen of the prevailing political party in the state, and it was assisted by some of the most distinguished literary men of the day. Both these reviews had prospered. Their circulation was believed to be, and was, very large. The great position and prosperity of Constable, especially, known in Edinburgh as 'the Crafty,' largely due to the wonderful success of The Edinburgh, naturally attracted the attention of156

Reviews and Magazines

[CH.

aspiring rivals in the trade. At this time, moreover, Blackwood was feeling keenly the defeat of a well-grounded hope that he had established a lasting connection with Scott by the publication of The Black Dwarf, which, however, after the fourth edition, had been, somewhat roughly, transferred to Constable. His feelings, as a high tory in politics, and as a rival in trade, concurred in stirring him to make a great effort to lower whig ascendency, tackle The Edinburgh Review and establish and promote the publishing fame of the house of Blackwood. In Blackwood's opinion, The Quarterly, however sound its principles, was too ponderous and dignified and middle-aged to counteract the mischief done by the brilliant and dashing organ of Jeffrey. He was in search of something lighter-an Edinburgh magazine 'more nimble, more frequent, more familiar.' His first start was disappointing, and, by the time that the third number of his monthly had been published, its insipidity, want of spirit and lack of party zeal had determined him to place its management in new hands. He saw the necessity of making a sensation. To begin with, at all events, it would be better to startle, and even to shock, the public than merely to win its respectful applause. And the three, in their different ways very gifted men, to whom he now turned were admirably suited for his purpose-Lockhart, in later days to become famous as editor of The Quarterly Review, and the biographer of Scott; Wilson, afterwards professor of moral philosophy and destined to live in English literature as 'Christopher North'; and Hogg, the Ettrick shepherd. The result of their joint lucubrations was the famous 'Chaldee MS.,' which, in language parodied from Scripture, overwhelmed, with scathing satire and personal ridicule, the best known and most respected notabilities of the Scottish metropolis. Blackwood was reckoning upon the outrageousness of his new number to advertise it. And he had not reckoned in vain, for its bitter personalities and strong flavour of irreverence at once roused a storm, and offended the literary world of Edinburgh. It is surprising that the excitement should have spread far beyond the bounds of Edinburgh and Scotland, where, alone, the personal and local allusions of this famous satire could have been appreciated. Blackwood and his friends had, in their immediate object, succeeded magnificently, for the October number had made Maga, as its supporters loved to call it, famous throughout the land. Still, notoriety and fame, thus achieved, brought down upon the heads of Blackwood and his coadjutors no little trouble.vI]

Lockhart

157

Libel actions and challenges to mortal combat filled the air. No one would own to being responsible editor; and, as to 'the Chaldee MS.,' it would seem to have slipped in almost unawares, if we can believe the account which Blackwood gave to those who threatened him. After a large number of copies had been sold, the magazine was suppressed, and future copies were published without the famous paper. In the eyes of readers of a century later, there are two articles in the same number that deserve even more serious condemnation: namely, the violent attack on Coleridge and his Biographia Literaria, written by Wilson, and the still more virulent attack on Leigh Hunt and the Cockney school of poetry, written by Lockhart. With Blackwood's Magazine, hatred of 'the school,' giving it an extended signification, became an obsession. Leigh Hunt, editor of the radical Examiner, was, doubtless, a red rag to the young tory writers of Maga; but they must have been blind indeed when they threatened with their wrath the 'minor adherents' of the school-' the Shelleys, the Keats's and the Webbes.' The only excuse Lockhart could make for himself in later years was his extreme youth at the time when he first entered the service of Maga. He had fallen under the influence of Wilson-a dozen years his senior-whose enthusiastic temperament and social charm, united with literary ability of a very high order, had, from the beginning, greatly impressed him. Lockhart consoled himself with the reflection that, in all probability, the reckless violence and personalities of his friend and himself had done no harm to anyone but themselves. The Magazine was sowing its wild oats, and it was some time before Blackwood and his merry men exerted themselves to acquire for it a respected and responsible character. Lockhart's best friends, including Walter Scott, regretted his close connection with what seemed to them to be a species of literary rowdyism; but Lockhart, though age moderated and softened him, ever remained unshaken in his allegiance to Maga. In 1819, the indefatigable publisher found another recruit for his turbulent monthly, in some ways no less remarkable than Lockhart and Wilson-the Irishman Maginn. A more brilliant trio of singular individualities have seldom been united in literary enterprise. Lockhart, a son of the manse, had won distinction in scholarship at the universities of Glasgow and Oxford. A born linguist, he had betaken himself to the study of German and Spanish literature. He had made the acquaintance of GoetheI58

Reviews and Maagazines

[CH.

at Weimar, and, on his return home, he must at once have found a position in the best literary circles of Edinburgh. Though he was called to the bar, it was soon evident that his activities would find their development rather in the pursuit of literature than in the practice of the law. Lockhart was exceedingly clever with his pencil as well as with his pen; and, in the exercise of both, he gave not a little amusement and offence to the good people of Edinburgh by the pungency of his clever caricatures and vivid word-sketches, which form part of Peter's Letters to his Kinsfolk, published in 1819. Wilson was a man of means, who, like Lockhart, had received his education at the universities of Glasgow and Oxford, and, in both, had won distinction as a scholar. As gentleman-commoner of Magdalen, he had, moreover, achieved fame among undergraduates as an athlete of great prowess, and some of his feats of strength and agility, especially a long-jump in Christchurch meadows, were long remembered. On leaving Oxford, he had bought the property of Elleray on lake Windermere, where he had soon become intimate with his poetical neighbours, Wordsworth, Coleridge and Southey; but the sudden loss of a large portion of his fortune compelled him to abandon the life of a country gentleman, and to seek remunerative employment in Edinburgh. His poems, The Isle of Palms and The City of the Plague, had already made him known there. Jeffrey was ready to welcome him, and, in 1818, inserted in The Edinburgh a very able article from his pen on the fourth canto of Childe Harold. But political differences in those days counted for much, and the energies of Wilson, withdrawn from The Edinburgh, were quickly absorbed in fighting the battles of toryism and Maga. The Edinburgh town council elected him in 1819 to the chair of moral philosophy in the university, over Sir William Hamilton-a startling and even outrageous proceeding, only, of course, to be accounted for by the fact that the party preferences of the town councillors dictated the selection. Nevertheless, Wilson was to prove a very good and stimulating professor. Lockhart and Wilson were now fast friends, differing greatly in personal characteristics, but alike in their recklessness and in the violence of their language and in the mischievous delight with which they assailed their foes and provoked commotion: Lockhart, 'the Scorpion which delighted to sting the faces of men,' Wilson, overflowing with boisterous animal spirits, warmhearted and generous, but heedless as to the strength of his blows, or as to restraining the violent outpouring of his feelings.vI]

Noctes Ambrosianae

I59

To these two Scotsmen-'the Great Twin Brethren,' as they are admiringly called in Annals of a Publishing House (Blackwood)-there was added a typical Irishman, the brilliant, rollicking, reckless Maginn, once a schoolmaster in Cork, a man of wit and learning, to whom Trinity college, Dublin, had given an honorary degree. Taken into the utmost confidence by the inner circle of Maga, Maginn, before long, was contributing a large portion of its articles and almost all its verse; and he did it a yet greater service, if it is true that the suggestion of the famous Noctes Ambrosianae came from him. It was from Maginn that Thackeray drew the portrait of captain Shandon in Pendennis. Garnett has described him as a man of undoubtedly extraordinary faculties. They were those of an accomplished scholar grafted on a brilliant improvisatore-the compound constituting a perfectly ideal magazinist. But, with all his endowments, his faults and failings were many. In 1830, he did good work in founding Fraser's Magazine (on the same lines as Blackwood), which, with the cooperation of such men as Coleridge and Thackeray and Carlyle, was for years to stand in the front rank of the monthlies. His connection with the newspaper press, however, tended to become less reputable, and his intemperate habits hastened the way downhill of a man who had many admirers, and no enemy but himself. The Blackwood group, however much their behaviour may have occasionally shocked public sensibilities, contained men of very remarkable genius. Through Wilson, De Quincey, now settled in Edinburgh, obtained his introduction to Blackwood, and it was as early as 7 January 1821 that he described himself, in a letter to the startled editor, as 'the Atlas of the Magazine,' who could alone 'save it from the fate which its stupidity deserved!' Coleridge, also an occasional contributor, was full of advice as to its proper management. Lockhart, Hogg, Wilson, De Quincey, Maginn would have been an awkward team for an editor or publisher of less commanding qualities than Blackwood to control. Noctes Ambrosianae added for many years greatly to the fame and popularity of Maga. Striking out a new line, these papers reported imaginary dialogues and conversations on questions and events of the day, on remarkable books and the characters of public men, carried on, at social gatherings and suppers at Ambrose's, with all the freedom of familiar intercourse between intimate friends. They were, to begin with, the composition of several authors, of Lockhart or Hogg, of Wilson or Maginn; but,i6o

Reviews and Magazines

[CH.

after two or three years, they became almost wholly the work of Wilson. Beginning in 1822, they continued till 1835, and number 71 papers. Of these, 41, Wilson's own composition, have been included in his collected works, edited by Ferrier, of which they form the first four volumes. The characters who occupy the stage are Christopher North (Wilson himself), Hogg, the Ettrick shepherd, Timothy Tickler, more or less an impersonation of a maternal uncle of Wilson, and, in a few papers, De Quincey-' the English Opium Eater,' and O'Doherty, representing Maginn. Sometimes, personages wholly fictitious are introduced, while, sometimes, real persons, without any consent of their own, are pressed into the service at the good pleasure of Maga. The inimitable wit and humour of these discussions, the freshness of thought and criticism, and the racy language of the talkers, have given Noctes a place in English literature. The impersonation of Hogg, in particular, is a realistic triumph, and in that vivid portraiture the Ettrick shepherd will live hardly less than in the records of his actual life and work. Another periodical of 'the nimbler and more familiar' kind came to life very soon after the start of Blackwood, and very warm grew the rivalry between the northern and the southern monthly. The London Magazine (1820-9) had a short but very distinguished career, during which it introduced to its readers the works of men who were to take a very high place in British literature. Leigh Hunt and Lamb and Hazlitt were, in a special degree, selected for denunciation by Maga and the hostile critics of the northern metropolis, as representative of what they, with lofty superiority, denominated 'the Cockney school.' In September 1821 appeared the first instalment of De Quincey's Confessions of an Opium Eater, which stimulated public curiosity, and which, as time went on, attracted a vast multitude of readers. In the September following was published that Dissertation on Roast Pig which ever since has been one of the most widely appreciated and frequently quoted of all the Essays of Elia. Keats, shortly before his death, published two poems in The London; but, neither in its poetry nor in its prose, could 'the Mohock Magazine' (for so the cockneys had nicknamed Maga) find anything in The London to mitigate the violence of its hostility. Maga was but slightly the senior of the conflicting magazines, The London's first number having appeared only a couple of years after 'the Chaldee MS.' had rendered Blackwood famous. As regards recourse to personalities and insults, there was little tovi] Colburn's New Monthly Magazine i6 choose between them. Literary criticism on either side became submerged in torrents of personal abuse; and, in accordance with the fashion of that day, it very soon became necessary for Lockhart and John Scott (the first editor of The London) to seek satisfaction by meeting each other 'on the sod.' A duel between them having, at the last moment, been averted by a clumsily managed and misapprehended arrangement, Lockhart returned to Scotland, only to hear from his friend and second, Christie, that he had himself felt bound to engage Scott in deadly combat at Chalk farm, and had left him mortally wounded on the field of battle. These unhappy events produced a great effect upon Lockhart, whom his wisest and truest friends, Walter Scott, Christie and others had in vain attempted to withdraw from intimate association with Mohock methods. Jeffrey, indeed, had felt himself compelled unwillingly to drop all connection with Maga's contributors. Political differences may, perhaps, have counted for something in bringing him to that determination; but that Murray, who was in strong political sympathy, and had, with Blackwood himself, a direct interest in the publication, should have withdrawn all countenance from it, and that Walter Scott should have remonstrated, indicate that, quite irrespective of party leanings, violence and personality had exceeded even the wide limits which the public sentiment of the day permitted. When, in 1821, Thomas Campbell undertook the editorship of Colburn's New Monthly Magazine, he declared in his preface that its main object would be literary, not political. It reported the news of the day, furnished a chronicle and register of events and contained valuable original papers, prose and poetry, covering a vast variety of subjects. Campbell's own Lectures on Poetry, and several of his most admired poems, such as The Last Man, first appeared in its pages. It was a miscellany, not a review or a critical journal at all; and, though he obtained the services of some distinguished men as contributors, Campbell's editorship, which lasted nine years, was hardly successful. And now a new era was opening for the monthlies, when the greatest masters of English fiction were to turn to them as providing the readiest access to the public ear, and when, for a magazine, there would be no such 'sheet anchor' as a great novelist. No one can take a broad survey of the work accomplished by the English reviews and magazines that came into existence in the earlier part of the nineteenth century, and by their successors, without being impressed by the immense service they have

E. L. XII. CH. VI.

11Reviews and Malgaines

[CH.

rendered to English literature, both by direct contribution, and by the support they have given (often essential support) to men in their younger days, who were to achieve future literary eminence. At the same time, it is difficult not to be struck by the strange fatality under which their criticism, in very conspicuous instances, went hopelessly astray. Especially in the hostile reception given to new poetical works of real genius, the leaders of English criticism appear, to the eyes of a later generation, to have been singularly blind. We have already noticed the attitude assumed by The Edinburgh towards Wordsworth and the 'lakers.' The Quarterly, in 1818, showed as little discrimination, in that wellknown article by the redoubtable Croker which has been popularly, but erroneously, made responsible for the death of Keats. In its centenary number, The Quarterly justly observed that a worse choice could not have been made than that of Croker for discussing the merits or demerits of 'the poet's poet'; since, though some poetry may have been within his range, and though he admired Scott and Byron, 'Croker was a thoroughly unpoetical person.' This is true; but, if an explanation, it is certainly no excuse for the choice. Inasmuch as Lockhart saw in Keats merely 'a cockney follower' of Leigh Hunt, and as Shelley, at this period, seems almost to have shared Lockhart's sentiments, it seems safer to fall back upon Andrew Lang's comment: Shelley's letter to Leigh Hunt, with Lockhart's obiter dicta, prove that poet and writer alike may fail fully to know contemporary genius when they meet it, and may as in Shelley's preference for Leigh Hunt to Keats prefer contemporary mediocrity1. It is not given to all men-even to all editors-to recognise 'genius when they meet it.' On the other hand, editors and critics have very often discovered, and enabled to win fame, quite unknown men, possessed, as the world in later days has recognised, of real ability, men who, but for them, might have had great difficulty in emerging from obscurity at all. Moreover, the editor of a periodical has often a difficult task in building up, out of varied and excellent material, a complete and effective whole. It is not surprising that the relations between Carlyle and his editors were, notwithstanding his indisputable genius, sometimes strained. He could not stand 'editorial hacking and hewing,' he wrote to Macvey Napier of The Edinburgh, for, surely, he, of all men, might be trusted to write quietly, without hysterical vehemence, as one

1 See Andrew Lang's Life of Lockhart, vol. i.VI]

Periodical Literature

I63

who not merely supposed but knew. Lockhart, of The Quarterly, was compelled to decline an article from Carlyle on chartism, partly, because he stood in awe of his powerful lieutenant, Croker, and, partly, because the article almost assumed the dimensions of a book. In the years 1833 and 1834, Sartor Resartus was appearing in Fraser; but the editor was hurrying it to a close, finding that it did not meet the taste of his readers. A century and more has passed since Walter Scott declared there was no literary criticism to be found outside The Edinburgh. In quantity, at all events, the deficiency was soon supplied; and quarterlies and monthlies and weekly and daily newspapers poured out a never ceasing flood of comment on almost every publication that saw the light. Reviews and magazines soon outgrew the extravagance of their stormy youth, and the excessive violence of language and the gross personalities once in fashion passed away almost as completely as the habit of duelling. The meeting between Jeffrey and Moore, and the more tragical encounter between Christie and Scott, brought credit to no one. Personal animosity and private dislike continued occasionally to colour criticism and to make it more scathing and pungent, as when Macaulay and Croker, in their respective organs, 'dusted each other's jackets'; but, differences between men of the pen were now leftt to the pen to settle; so, even the courts of law ceased to be invoked in their quarrels. The extraordinary development of periodical literature, as of journalism, in recent times, has greatly changed the character of literary criticism and the public to which it appealed-so much so that it is difficult for us, nowadays, to understand the thrill of emotion with which the first number of The Edinburgh was received, or the violent excitement created throughout the country by the extravagancies and absurdities of 'the Chaldee MS.' Yet, the great services rendered, in the early years of the nineteenth century, by the pioneers of the new advance of periodical literature in this country, and of independent criticism in many fields, in that of literature more especially, will, nevertheless, remain unforgotten.

11-2CHAPTER VII

HAZLITT OF the group of romantic writers whose work appeared chiefly in the magazines of the first quarter of the nineteenth century, no one led an existence more detached than William Hazlitt. By temperament, he loved isolation, delighting to go alone on his walks into the country so that he might turn over in his mind some favourite abstract proposition and try to analyse, for his own gratification, some peculiar phase of human nature. In thinking upon political affairs he had assumed a position at variance with that held by most contemporary Englishmen. 'He wilfully placed himself,' writes De Quincey, 'in collision with all the interests that were in the sunshine of this world and with all the persons that were then powerful in England.' That he was not popular did not, however, make him, like Swift, a cynic. He had no high social ambitions which could not be realised. No man was ever more free from the desire of political preferment. Apparently, his highest aim was to write in a manner that would satisfy himself Disappointment came to him when he saw others treat lightly convictions to which he clung with desperate earnestness. He was embittered when he discovered a friend wavering in his loyalty to a cherished ideal or when some one spoke with derision of his idols, especially of Rousseau, Napoleon, or the principles of the French revolution. With almost everybody worth knowing in London he became acquainted, but he quarrelled with all, so that when he died, in 1830, only Charles Lamb stood at his bedside. If we really learn to understand this isolated temperament, we shall find an admirable strain of courage and honesty, a conspicuous lack of double-dealing in a time when it might have been of temporary advantage for him to have trimmed his sails to the varying winds. No less a man than Charles Lamb discovered the real heart; for he wrote to Southey: 1 should belie my own conscience if I said less than that I think W. H. to be in his natural and healthy state one of the wisest and finest spiritsCH. VI] Hazlitt's Early Years 165 breathing. So far from being ashamed of that intimacy which was betwixt us, it is my boast that I was able for so many years to have preserved it entire, and I think I shall go to my grave without finding, or expecting to find, such another companion. Some light may be thrown upon Hazlitt's temperament and upon his antagonistic attitude toward the prevailing opinions of his day by a recital of some of the incidents of his life. From his forbears, he inherited traditions of dissent. His paternal ancestors had come originally from Holland to Ireland. There, the elder William Hazlitt was born and grew to be a man of strong character, destined to impress those with whom he associated. He received the master's degree from the university of Glasgow, where he established for himself a reputation for liberal views on religion and politics. He married the daughter of a nonconformist ironmonger and began his career as a unitarian minister. Wherever his profession took him, he attracted men of such intellectual ability as Priestley and Benjamin Franklin and achieved more than local fame on account of his powers of discussion. At Maidstone, William Hazlitt, the future essayist, was born on 10 April 1778. From Maidstone, the family moved to Bandon, county Cork, Ireland, where the father aroused the suspicions of the townspeople by an apparently too great devotion to the cause of the American soldiers in Kinsale prison. Recognising his increasing unpopularity, he decided to try his fortunes in America. Like many a radical of his day, he believed that there his ideals of liberty would become a reality. His three years in America present shifting scenes ending in disappointment and a determination that his family should return to England. In the following winter (1787-8), the father was called to the little church at Wem, near Shrewsbury. For more than a quarter of a century, the Hazlitts lived in this remote village. Most of the years between the age of ten and twentytwo, young William spent at Wem. So far, there is little indication of what the future had in keeping for the son of the poor, obscure, dissenting minister. The diary written by his sister Margaret in America attests his delight in the long walks across country with his father in Massachusetts. Numerous references in his essays describe with enthusiasm the pleasure which he found in walking with his father in the country about Wem and in talking on metaphysical subjects. The other influence which seems with increasing years to have grown into a passion is the impression of nature upon him. Hisi66

Hazlitt

[CH.

eye was ever turned out of the window. In his own garden at Wem, he watched with a sympathy akin to Thoreau's 'the broccoli plants and kidney beans of his own rearing.' His tramps led him into all parts of Shropshire, to Peterborough, and into Wales. Nature was 'company enough' for him. Although he afterwards wrote much and well about books, he always associated everything with outdoor life-books which he had read, churches or pictures which he had seen, people whom he had met. Even the battles of Napoleon had such associations: On the same day the news of the battle of Austerlitz came; I walked out in the afternoon and, as I returned, saw the evening star set over a poor man's cottage with other thoughts and feelings than I shall ever have again. He struggled long and hard to find himself and his place in the world. When he was fifteen, he was sent by his father to the nonconformist theological seminary at Hackney. There, he found a deal of metaphysics to his liking, and, also, soon discovered that the ministry was not to be his calling. Fortunately for him, his brother John was a portrait-painter in London working under the direction of Sir Joshua Reynolds. To his brother's studio, William made frequent visits and became enamoured of the profession of painting. He was more than ever in doubt what to do. After an unsuccessful year at school, he returned to Wem. He could not preach, he would like to paint, he wished to write but could not. 'I was at that time dumb, inarticulate, helpless like a worm by the wayside.' One day, in 1796, he found a copy of Burke's Letter to a Voble Lord. For the first time, he felt what it must be to write, 'to be able to convey the slightest conception of my meaning to others in words.' Then, a new light shone into his soul. He met Coleridge, heard him preach, walked and talked with him and was invited to visit him at Nether Stowey and to meet Wordsworth. What this meant for Hazlitt he has described, with the charm of a poet, in My First Acquaintance with Poets, one of the finest essays in the language. As if from a dream, the young man of twenty arose with a resolution that the greatest discouragements could not shake off. Not quite ready to give up painting, he spent a little while with his brother in London. He crossed to the Louvre, where, for several months, he made copies of the masters for friends at home and actually went about in northern England painting portraits of his father, Wordsworth, Coleridge, Lamb and others. Then, his career as a painter came abruptly to a close. Nothing remained for him but to write.VII]

His Later Lfe

I67

Like the careers of the other romantic essayists of the period, Hazlitt's life presents nothing of thrilling interest. We know little about it, aside from references in his essays, in the interesting diary of Crabb Robinson and in the letters of Charles and Mary Lamb. He became a friend of the most notable people in London; above all, he was always welcome at the rooms of the Lambs. He has left us the best description of one of their Wednesday evenings. Unfortunately, he came to know a certain Sarah Stoddart, a friend of Mary Lamb. After an unromantic courtship, they were married in 1808, with Charles Lamb as one of the four witnesses. Charles wrote ominously to Southey, 'I was at Hazlitt's marriage and had like to have been turned out several times during the ceremony. Anything awful makes me laugh.' After the wedding, the Hazlitts moved to Sarah's cottage at Winterslow, a little village about six miles from Salisbury. For about three years they lived at Winterslow, and afterwards, for brief periods, Hazlitt repaired thither to obtain some of the seclusion which contributed largely to his best writing. To neither of the two persons was the union agreeable, and they planned to go together to Scotland to obtain a divorce. A second marriage, with a Mrs Bridgewater, proved a mere episode in his life and seemed to confirm the opinion held by his friends that at least Hazlitt's temper was not conducive to a life of marital happiness. Twenty-five years were allotted to Hazlitt for his life-work. In that short span, he succeeded in making his way to fame from absolute obscurity, without the prestige of family or wealth, with no formal education and no friends of influence. This he achieved at a time when there were many men of Titanic mould. He won distinction as a lecturer; his criticisms on books, pictures and plays were widely read; he became known as one of the best talkers and he was the target of the invectives of some of the cleverest, as well as the most brutal, of the reviewers in the leading magazines. The writings of Hazlitt have recently been collected by A. R. Waller and Arnold Glover and published in twelve large, closely printed volumes, in all about six thousand pages. Not many of us would wish to read all these pages. Some of his writing is forced and superficial, notably his essays on philosophy; some is unpleasant, for example, the sentimental record of his passion for the stupid servant girl in Liber Amoris; some is bitter and full of prejudice; but, withal, there is much, very much, that is fine, so fine that William Ernest Henley only yesterday couldi68

Hazlitt

[CH.

say, 'Hazlitt is ever Hazlitt; and at his highest moments Hazlitt is hard to beat, and has not these many years been beaten.' In whatever he did he was an enthusiast. The same gusto which, as a boy, he had shown in his discussions with his father, he displayed in his reading of philosophy and in his first attempt (Essay on the Principles of Human Action, 1805) to elucidate the systems of Hartley and Helvetius. He liked to cherish his experiences: books that he had read, plays which he had seen, pictures that he had admired. He liked to discuss abstract propositions while he walked alone in the country, trying to 'forget the town and all that is in it.' He liked to tell what he liked and, above everything, he liked to try to say things in his own way. And he succeeded so well that Stevenson, who admired him ungrudgingly, once said of him, 'We are all mighty fine fellows, but none of us can write like Hazlitt.' Certainly, it was, for him, better 'to travel than to arrive'; else, it would be difficult to understand how a man so widely hated, so bitterly attacked, so much alone, could say on his death-bed: 'Well, I have had a happy life.' The subjects of his lectures or essays on authors and their works include almost every name worth knowing in English literature from Chaucer to Hazlitt's own day-men of varied literary attainment of the Elizabethan era, wits of the restoration, comic writers, dramatists, poets, novelists of the eighteenth century and almost all his contemporaries. When we consider that he did not have the guides and handbooks of today which tell us dogmatically what to like and how to appreciate the masterpieces of English literature, we get a better understanding of the range and variety of these criticisms. He had had almost no formal training, he knew little of ancient classical literature in the original languages; but, somehow, in his goings to and fro, he had laid hold of some of the great books of the world and he had read them well: perhaps he knew Shakespeare best, Montaigne was his model essayist and he knew something of Le Sage, Rabelais, Rousseau, Boccaccio, Cervantes, Goethe and Schiller. Among English writers, his favourites were Spenser, Milton, Congreve, Swift, Arbuthnot, Burke, Fielding, Richardson and Scott. If his preparation for the task of a literary critic seems not what we should expect today, certainly we are surprised how well he succeeded in appraising the best English literature. Perhaps his greatest service to his time was the attention which heVII]

Haz/itt as a Critic

I69

directed to Shakespeare. Chagrined by the lack of intelligent English criticism of Shakespeare, he praised without reserve A. W. Schlegel for his sympathetic interpretation and set to work to discuss each play with a gusto that has never been excelled. Heine stated that, up to his time, Hazlitt's was the best comment on Shakespeare. Perhaps his criticism lacked the profoundness and philosophical insight of Coleridge and the affectionate appreciation of Lamb, but it is more inclusive than either. For the reader of today who wishes to read the plays of Shakespeare with unadulterated enjoyment, not deviating into dogmatic assertion or scientific research, Hazlitt is a sure guide. His series of comments on Shakespeare's plays and characters is a challenge to the reader to turn again to the scenes where he will find something new in an old familiar passage. We can be certain that Hazlitt has not led us into a waste of philological or philosophical speculation. He does not put himself between Shakespeare and ourselves but helps us to know Shakespeare better as a poet and as a dramatist who saw life from many angles. Likewise, the other dramatists of Shakespeare's day and writers of prose receive most intelligent appreciation. Perhaps the best of his critical work is the clear and discriminating interpretation of the spirit of the Elizabethan age. Sifting the gold from the dross, he sets in proper place the men and forces which made the era great. In his discussion of seventeenth century writers, he sounds surprisingly modern. His regard for Milton, Bunyan, Sir Thomas Browne and Jeremy Taylor does not show the same degree of devotion as does Lamb's quaint imitation of them, but his judgment of their work as literature is certainly more to be trusted by the reader who desires to view English literature in its true perspective. Like many of his successors, Hazlitt found the eighteenth century interesting in its virility, and his preferences are amazingly supported by the best judgment of today. He appreciated intelligently the forceful simplicity of eighteenth century style and inherited the best qualities of that style. He displayed genius in his ability to discern what was real beneath the formality and affectation of eighteenth century manners. His criticism of Pope, whom most of his contemporaries did not understand, shows with what intelligence he recognised Pope as the poet of art in contrast with Shakespeare the poet of nature. He extolled the eloquence of Burke and urged repeatedly that here was the finest model for the expression, in prose, of imaginative feeling.170 Hazlitt [CH. Hazlitt's criticism of his contemporaries in The Spirit of the Age is in accord with his courageous position on all questions. That he should sit in judgment on his own friends seemed to him as natural as that he should speak out what he thought of writers long since dead. It was inevitable that the personal estimate should play a part here; but it is remarkable how a full century accepts his verdict. To be sure, there are bits of illtemper and personal prejudice, but there is so much which is sound and genuine that it is safe to say that these essays are almost the last of Hazlitt's writings which the student of English literature would surrender. The particular essays show the fighting qualities of a man who was animated with fiery courage, whom Gifford and the whole pack of hostile reviewers found a most worthy antagonist. What he thought most worthy we still admire, Coleridge, Cobbett, Scott, 'the greatest and wisest' of the novelists, Wordsworth, 'the most original poet now living.' We do not hate all that he hated, but what he loved we find is most deserving of our love. To his envious contemporaries, who taunted him with a lack of reading which, they affirmed, was displayed by the frequent recurrence of the same quotation in his essays, he said, I have been found fault with for repeating myself and for a narrow range of ideas. To a want of general reading I plead guilty and am sorry for it but perhaps if I had read more I might have thought less. Perhaps that was an easy way to excuse himself; but it is true that he tried most earnestly to cultivate the habit of thinking, and detested nothing so much as servile imitation. He wished to think and feel for himself. If he did not drink deep, he was an expert taster. He wrote as he would have talked, guided by an unusually catholic sympathy. No one literary form or period, author or group of writers blinded him to the enjoyment of the long sweep of varied literary expression. He had not sworn allegiance to any school. Without historical or scientific equipment, he was possessed of a rare faculty for describing a literary movement and putting his finger on the central and impelling force. For the mere dates of an author's life or mere linguistic details, he had little interest. His enjoyment of Hamlet, Lear, Othello, was not affected by any questions of textual uncertainty or priority of composition. To him, it was sufficient that here was poetry of a high order, that here was something that made him glad to be alive. An important contribution of Hazlitt is his comment on theviI]

Hazlixt's Dramatic Criticism

171

stage, largely included in A Review of the English Stage; or, A Series of Dramatic Criticisms (1818, 1821). His first continuous employment was on The Morning Chronicle, in 1813, for which he wrote his first dramatic criticism, and, save for a few unimportant things by Leigh Hunt, the first of its kind in our literature. Later, he wrote for The Examiner, The Champion, The Times and, finally, The London Mlagazine. These hundred or more of articles include much interesting discussion of the theatres, plays and actors of his time. His visits took him to Drury lane, Covent garden, The Haymarket, The Lyceum, The King's, Surrey, The Adelphi, The Coburg, The Aquatic and The East London. He wrote of all the plays of Shakespeare, of those of the restoration and the eighteenth century which were still given and of the first performances of plays of his own time. He described winter and summer plays, pantomimes, operas and oratorios. He has left the best account of the actors and actresses whom he saw, the Kembles, Kean, Macready, Booth, Bannister, Miss Stephens, Mrs Siddons, as well as sketches of others of whom we now know only the names. As with his appreciation of literature, Hazlitt was not a formal critic of the drama and theatre. His taste was formed under the direction of his feelings.' He wrote of the drama with gusto, not because it was a great literary form made illustrious by Shakespeare, possessed of formal technique and of a brilliant history, but because he liked to go to the play to see 'the happy faces in the pit,' to watch the actors in their parts and then, enriched by the happy experiences of the evening, to go home to think it all over. 'We like the stage because we like to talk about ourselves.' 'We do not like any person or persons who do not like plays.' His criticism is the vivid record of these impressions. He watched closely the entrances and exits of the actors, their eyes, faces, hands, listened to the cadences of the spoken sentences, and marked the differences in an actor on successive evenings. Rarely did he analyse a play as a formal composition, nor was he much interested in the technique of the verse. The fine speeches held him and the varying gales of passion, as they sweep the characters into this or that extremity. A drama was something to be played, and his comments took the form of personal descriptions of Kemble as Sir Giles Overreach, Miss O'Neill as Lady Teazle, Mrs Siddons as Lady Macbeth, Macready as Othello, or Kean as Iago, Shylock or Richard III. In this field, he was a pioneer and his writings mark an epoch in the history of theatrical criticism. Before his day, honest172

Hazlitt

[CH.

reviews of plays were unknown. Leigh Hunt had seen the opportunity and had introduced the new department in The Examiner, but his imprisonment and that of his brother on account of libellous publications had prevented the continuance of this phase of their work. Not only was Hazlitt the first to give attention to dramatic criticism, but he was, also, without special training for this form of writing. He had always liked to go to the play and, in the years of his closest intimacy with Charles Lamb, had spent many evenings in the different London theatres. His fondness for the theatre and his natural zest in human action were a sufficient preparation for him in any work which required the power of observation and of vivid description. As a critic of the stage, he conceived it to be his duty to be fair to the actor and to the public. We doubt if he allowed himself to express an opinion which he did not sincerely hold, or indulge in praise or blame which he thought not deserved. Though I do not repent of what I have said in praise of certain actors, yet I wish I could retract what I had been obliged to say in reprobation of actors.... I never understood that the applauded actor thought himself personally obliged to the newspaper critic; the latter was merely supposed to do his duty. As a boy and as a young man, Hazlitt loved pictures. To him, they were the reflection of what was beautiful in nature. It will be remembered that he tried to become a painter and turned aside from that profession only when he recognised that he could not be equal to any one of his ideal painters, Claude, Rembrandt, Titian or Raphael. He wrote once, 'I am a slave to the picturesque,' and so he was. In the face of nature, he saw the charm of line and colour, and his essays abound in passages that could only have been written by one who was sensitive to those effects of landscape which the painter sees. Doubtless, he had some skill of hand, for his brother and friends encouraged him to become a painter, but he felt that, in this work, he could not succeed, and, therefore, would not try. Happily for English literature, however, he knew much about painting from his conversations with Flaxman, Haydon and Northcote and his reading of Sir Joshua Reynolds and Jonathan Richardson, and, equipped with this knowledge, he turned from painting to writing about pictures. It is safe to say that no essayist, contemporary with him, was his equal in natural aptitude or in knowledge of what the painter was trying to achieve, although he never really fashioned his ideas into a system. As in his other criticism, he was an enthusiastVII]

Hazlitt's Writings oni rt

I73

depending upon the turn taken by his personal impressions. One requirement only he insisted upon: that 'art must be true to nature.' By this, he meant no mere photographic reproduction, but an interpretation of nature by the artist, expressed in such a way that the picture conveyed a meaning. So, he never thought of praising mere technical excellence. The canvasses of his beloved Claude, Titian, Rembrandt were more than mere delineations, they were allied to poetry, each expressing, in its own beautiful form, the meaning of life, an emanation of the moral and intellectual part of our nature, as well as of the sensitive. In his appreciation of painting, he tried, above everything else, to be honest with himself. He did not lack the courage to say what he honestly felt or saw. Before Ruskin was born, he wrote: 'In landscape Turner has shown a knowledge of the effects of air and of powerful relief in objects which was never surpassed.' He was not less ready to praise rising young artists, such as Haydon and Wilson, than he was to join in the universal approbation of such masters as Claude, Poussin, Rembrandt or Titian. And he would as readily indicate what he regarded as faults in the masters as praise the excellence of artists hitherto unknown. If he got no further than an expression of his feelings, at any rate he said what he liked, not because it was the fashion to like a certain picture or because he found it starred in a guide-book, but because he liked it. Mly taste in pictures is, I believe, very different from that of rich and princely collectors.... I should like to have a few pictures hung round the room that speak to me with well-known looks, that touch some string of memory, not a number of varnished, smooth, glittering gew-gaws. Like some other writers of the romantic period, he contributed little or nothing to a philosophical discussion of the arts. Ever since the wonderful day when he acted as guide to Charles and Mary Lamb through the gallery of Blenheim, he has been an inspiration to the layman who has wished to cultivate a liking for good pictures. At a time when few people were allowed to see famous paintings in English galleries, Hazlitt described these pictures for his readers vividly and rapturously, before Ruskin's sympathetic criticism, with its imaginative descriptions of pictures and buildings, made people see more in the world that lay about them. That his work had a serious result is attested by Gosse, who, in the introduction to his edition of Hazlitt's Conversations of James Northcote, says: 'he claimed for painting the identity of a branchI74 Hazlitt [CH. of literature and expended on it the wealth of his ever-fervid and impassioned imagination.' For the majority of readers, the most interesting part of Hazlitt's work is to be found in his miscellaneous essays. Like his most worthy contemporaries, Lamb, De Quincey, Wordsworth, Byron, Shelley, he set forth his personal experiences and his personal prejudices. Here, then, we come nearest to the real man Hazlitt. To repeat the lines which he frequently quoted, he liked To pour out all as plain As downright Shippen or as old Montaigne. The best of Hazlitt, then, is to be found in such essays as Mgy First Acquaintance with Poets, On Going a Journey, The Feeling of Immortality in Youth, On Reading Old Books, On Reading New Books, Of Persons One Would Wish to have Seen, On the Fear of Death, On Disagreeable People, On Taste, On Familiar Style, The Sick Chamber, The Fight. After everything has been sifted, Hazlitt is to be judged by these essays, and, doubtless, he would be willing to have it so. On one occasion, he wrote, 'I have not written a line that licks the dust.' Incidents of his early life had kept burning the fires of independence and courageous expression. Born in a family known for its hearty acceptance of the views of dissent, he had grown up in close association with his father, with whom he enjoyed discussion upon the most abstract subjects. To the ideals of his youth he had clung tenaciously and he had shunned the appearance of deserting the cause of republicanism or liberty in any form. His first published composition was a letter to The Shrewsbury Chronicle (1791), in which he stood out for fair treatment of Priestley, whose house had been burned by a mob in Birmingham. He did not follow the judgments of English critics, neither was he held in thrall by the thought of Germany or France. He wished to see and feel things for himself. This spirit of independence, sometimes blinded by ill-temper or bitter resentment, was always asserting itself, whether in championing the cause of a new actor, in praising an aspiring young painter, in giving a new turn to an old definition or in holding at bay the pack of reviewers whose numbers made them bold to attack a superior antagonist. He was born not to be a coward. He was a good fighter. Although he often found himself in a minority of one, he found enjoyment in the feeling that he was right according to his abstract principles.VII]

-His lModels

1'75

For us, the most interesting result of this independence is his resolution not to be satisfied with anything short of his best in writing. Two fine examples always stood before him-Montaigne, 'who may be said to have been the first to say as an author what he felt as a man,' and Burke, who 'poured out his mind on paper.' He has told us, in many places, of his difficulty in learning how to write. Oh, how little do they know who have never done anything but repeat after others by rote, the labor, the yearnings and misgivings of mind it costs to get the germ of an original idea, to dig it out of the hidden recesses of thought and nature and to bring it half-ashamed, struggling, and deformed into the day-to give words and intelligible symbols to that which was never imagined or expressed before. That he succeeded to an unusual degree in his ambition is now a matter of record. Coleridge wrote of him that 'he said things in his own way.' His vigorous mind, seriously given to thinking, would not be satisfied with expression that fell short of his conception of clearness. He was not content with the homely simplicity of Defoe, or the intellectual force of Swift: he aspired to succeed, as Burke had succeeded, in conveying something of the beauty and eloquence of truth and nature. What he wrote must express all the shades of his sensitive imagination. It is not strange, then, that he knew the meaning of words and strove unceasingly to get the proper word for the proper place. The ephemeral word or phrase found no place in his style, nor was he given to coining words or to transplanting foreign words. Consequently, his diction is remarkable for its purity. How well he made the standard English vocabulary serve his purpose may be found in his description of The Fight, where he does not feel the need of adopting the slang of the ring to give a thrilling account of an exciting contest. It is interesting to contrast this passage with De Quincey's Murder as one of the Fine Arts. Not only did he search for the right word but he strove for conciseness in so far as the language would convey all that he wished to say. 'I hate to see a load of band-boxes go along the street, and I hate to see a parcel of big words without anything in them.' Hazlitt seems never to have been without the word which would express with directness and vividness what was in his mind. That he could parry as with a rapier, William Gifford must have learned to his discomfort while he read the celebrated Letter. De Quincey called his style 'abrupt, insulated, capricious, and...non-sequacious.' There is a sense in which this is true. For176

Hazlitt

[CH.

a time, the thought seems not to move. It is thrown into the air like balls by a juggler, and we catch reflections of it, and are thrilled and excited to pleasure in watching. One happy phrase after another-an old quotation in a new setting, a flash of sentiment, a bit of keen perceiving, a wise observation on life-all thrown together, carry us on with a rapidity and a stateliness that are not excelled in English literature. The opening passage of his essay on poetry illustrates the movement of his expository writing. Here, we have Hazlitt thinking with overflowing zest upon a subject which was life to him. Because he is trying to write something on a subject which every critic or poet has discussed does not embarrass him. As a man of feeling, who cannot reduce poetry to mere formal words, he pours himself out with the richness and seriousness of the most unabashed romanticist. Or we may turn to his essay, The Feeling of Immortality in Youth, to the passage beginning 'To see the golden sun, and the azure sky.' Observe the gusto with which he follows the thought until he is actually out of breath. Here is the elaborate stateliness of Sir Thomas Browne or Jeremy Taylor without the quaintness of the seventeenth century which allured Charles Lamb. In outline, it is formal and imposing; in meaning, it is concrete, vivid and personal. The virility of his enthusiasm is best shown in his delight in outdoor life. No writer of today, after a century given to the study and enjoyment of open air life, writes of it with greater zest and more consistent inspiration. His essay, On Going a Journey, is a pleasure to all lovers of Stevenson and Thoreau. In many respects, the most memorable piece of writing of William Hazlitt is the essay to which he has given the attractive title, My First Acquaintance with Poets, one of the fine, immortal essays in our language. The young man of twenty meets in 1798 the philosopher Coleridge and the poet Wordsworth. The man of forty looks back through the glamour of the intervening years and breaks forth with lyric enthusiasm at the thought of these rich experiences. In these essays, we have some of the best of Hazlitt-an expression which is concrete, vivid, personal, vigorous; the voice of a manly and courageous seeker after truth, who sees nothing inconsistent in the combination of truth and sentiment, truth and beauty. Hazlitt's habit of repeated quotation has caused irritation toVI ]

1His Quotations

I77

many readers. He used innumerable quotations, consisting of a mere phrase or of many lines, whenever he desired. If they do not serve him as they stand, he does not hesitate to change a word or phrase or to join two or more quotations together. He took supreme pleasure in an apt phrase, whether of his own coinage or whether he had picked it up long before in some source which he had taken no pains to remember. He sought justification in the manner in which he made his quotations convey his own ideas. Some of the lines which he liked best to quote are here given as he wrote them. 'Our life is of mingled yarn, good and ill together,' 'holds the mirror up to nature,' 'web of our life,' 'too much i' the sun,' 'comes home to the business of men,' 'the stuff of which our life is made,' 'sees into the life of things,' 'ever in the haunch of winter sings,' 'fate, fore-will, foreknowledge absolute,' 'come like shadows, so depart,' 'at one proud swoop,' 'with all its giddy raptures,' 'the witchery of the soft blue sky,' 'it smiled and it was cold, 'sounding on his way,' 'men's minds are parcel of their fortunes.' A glance at this list will show the preponderance of quotations from Shakespeare. These he applied everywhere and in every possible connection. Next after Shakespeare, as sources, come Milton, the Bible, Spenser, Dryden, Pope, Gray, Cowper, Rousseau, Sterne, Fielding, Wordsworth. He had not the slightest reluctance to appropriate a phrase that he liked in any book which he read. One characteristic marks his style especially, his use of the parallel construction and contrast. He liked to join his subjects in pairs; for example, Cant and Hypocrisy, Wit and Humour, Past and Future, Thought and Action, Genius and Common Sense, Patronage and Puffing, Writing and Speaking and so on ad infinitum. So, he was much accustomed to discussing his subject with the aid of contrast, as Wilkie and Hogarth, Shakespeare and Jonson, Chaucer and Spenser, Voltaire and Swift, Thomson and Cowper, Addison and Steele, Gray and Collins, Dryden and Pope. In this particular, he had an influence upon modern literary criticism, which has often used this means of defining the relative importance of English writers. Some readers, nourished on the fare of the Victorians, have objected to Hazlitt on the ground that his writing shows mere feeling and no moral purpose. Certainly, one does not think of him as a moralist with a message like Carlyle, Ruskin, Arnold, or Browning, yet he, like all great English writers, was guided by certain principles and was consistently true to certain ideals. E. L. XII. CH. VII. 12178

Hazlitt

[cH.

Hazlitt was as bitter against affectation and insipidity as Carlyle or Thackeray. Not more insistently than he, did Carlyle try to get beneath mere clothes and separate the symbol from the thing. Ruskin had no more genuine love of nature and saw not more clearly than Hazlitt the relation between life and the beauty of nature. In his efforts to think clearly upon life and to express himself with classic simplicity, there is a suggestion of Matthew Arnold. In his virility of expression and the hopefulness with which he wrote in continued adversity, we find something that suggests the optimism of Browning and Stevenson. Though he was not a moralist according to the general meaning of that word, he never turned from the serious problem of life. He was no shallow optimist or railing pessimist. There is, throughout his writing, an abiding faith in human nature, a devotion to beauty and an allegiance to ideals of square-dealing, honesty and truthfulness, that made his life happy when those who looked on-all save onecalled him of all men most lonely and miserable. The influence of Hazlitt has been pervasive through the nineteenth century. Among his contemporaries, there were those who would have nothing to do with his idols, Rousseau and Napoleon, who did not share his radical views on politics, who despised his enthusiastic style as mere sentimental twaddle.' On the other hand, there were those who, like Leigh Hunt, Lamb, Coleridge and De Quincey, recognised, in some measure, the worth of the man. Certain of the reviewers in the magazines, though they took delight in abusing him personally, had good cause for admiring his literary skill when they were the objects of his invective. Among the great writers of English since his day, he has found many admirers and imitators, many who have followed his lead in his appreciation of art and of literature. Macaulay had a fondness for the same balanced structure, the same tendency toward epigrammatic expression, the same persistent determination to write with unmistakable clearness. Newman's style bore ample testimony to the eloquence which Hazlitt displayed in his most stately writing. Thackeray wrote heartily in admiration: Hazlitt was one of the keenest and brightest critics that ever lived. With partialities and prejudices innumerable, he had a wit so keen, a sensibility so exquisite, an appreciation of humour or pathos or even of the greatest act so lively, quick and cultivated, that it was always good to know what were the impressions made by books or men or pictures on such a mind; and that, as there were not probably a dozen men in England with powers so varied, all the rest of the world might be rejoiced to listen to the opinions of this accomplished critic.__ -

TT 7 TT 71

VIIj iieney on Iazlztt 179 In similar vein wrote Froude, Bagehot, Lowell, Stevenson and many other worthy judges of our best literature. Perhaps the surest comment which indicates the estimate of today is by William Ernest Henley in the concluding paragraph of his introduction to the complete edition of Hazlitt's works, already cited: As a writer, therefore, it is with Lamb that I would bracket him: they are dissimilars, but they go gallantly and naturally together-par nobile fratrum. Give us these two, with some ripe Cobbett, a volume of Southey, some Wordsworth, certain pages of Shelley, a great deal of the Byron who wrote letters, and we get the right prose of the time. The best of it all, perhaps, is the best of Lamb. But Hazlitt's, for different qualities, is so imminent and shining a second that I hesitate as to the pre-eminency. Probably the race is Lamb's. But Hazlitt is ever Hazlitt; and at his highest moments Hazlitt is hard to beat, and has not these many years been beaten.

12-2CHAPTER VIII

LAMB BY reason of its intimate nature and the colour which it took from the personal events of his life, the work of Charles Lamb is inseparable from the circumstances in which it came into being. This is peculiarly true of more than one of the great writers of the early nineteenth century. The biographies of Byron, Shelley and Coleridge are necessary complements to the understanding of their poetry. But, in none of these three cases is a succession of incidents so closely interwoven in prose and poetry as is the more peaceful life of Lamb in his writings. Those writings, inspired by the influence of the moment and by a lively remembrance of the past, take their place in the course of a story on which they form a running comment; and it is this story, chequered by the presence of sorrow and tragedy and beautified by the endurance of high human affection, which has given Lamb a special place in literary history. His genius matured in submission to its influence: the experience of daily life was the source of the sympathy with humanity which pervades his style and lends to it an abiding charm. Lamb's statement that his father came from Lincoln has never been proved positively, but is probably an exception to his usual habit of embroidering fiction upon fact. John Lamb, whose characteristics are known to us from his son's affectionate portrait of Lovel, 'a man of an incorrigible and losing honesty,' with 'a face as gay as Garrick's, whom he was said greatly to resemble,' was clerk and general factotum to Samuel Salt of the Inner Temple. The father, 'as brimful of rogueries and inventions as you could desire,' gave some proof of literary talent in a small volume entitled Poetical Pieces on Several Occasions, the best of which, an amusing description of the daily routine of a lady's footman, was probably drawn from his own early experience. He married Elizabeth Field, a member of a family of Hertfordshire farmers.CH. VIII]

School-days

i8i

They lived in Salt's house at 2 Crown office row, in the Inner Temple, Mrs Lamb acting as housekeeper. Their eldest son, John, described by Lamb as James Elia, was born in June 1763. Mary Lamb was the second child, born in December 1764. Charles, the youngest, was born on 10 February 1775. Four other children, two boys and two girls, died in infancy. Salt's house in the Temple was Lamb's home for the first seventeen years of his life. Here, Mary Lamb, ten years his senior, was tumbled early, by accident or design, into a spacious closet of good old English reading, without much selection or prohibition, and browsed at will upon that fair and wholesome pasturage. In the quiet courts and 'bricky towres' of the Temple, close to, yet aloof from, 'streaming London's central roar,' Lamb learned to survey the ways of the world about him with sympathetic observation, and to interpret them in their true proportions with an amused delight at their variety and movement. London, 'itself a pantomime and masquerade,' early enveloped him with its attraction. 'I often shed tears in the motley Strand,' he wrote to Wordsworth in 1801, 'from fulness of joy at so much life.' To Manning and to Robert Lloyd, his praise of his native city is equally lyric, and, throughout life, London continued to supply his imagination with material upon which it readily worked its fantasies. Lamb learned reading and writing at a day-school in Fetter lane, kept by one William Bird, which he attended with his sister and afterwards described in Captain Starkey, one of the essays contributed to Hone's Every-Day Book. In October 1782, he entered Christ's hospital, having been presented to the foundation by one of the governors, a friend of Samuel Salt. His recollections of the seven years spent here are embodied in an essay printed in The Gentleman's Magazine for June 1813, and in the more famous essay in which he blended his own experiences with the less happy memories of his contemporary Coleridge. The friendship with Coleridge, begun at Christ's hospital, lasted, with one short break, throughout their lives. In a famous apostrophe, touched with that sense of regret for wasted energy and unfulfilled hope which Coleridge's later career naturally inspired, Lamb has recorded his admiration for the precocious genius of his friend. Coleridge, equally affectionate but less alive to reality, has characterised Lamb as the 'gentle-hearted Charles.' Gentle-hearted as he was182

Lamb

[CH.

in the best sense of the word, Lamb resented the epithet, and, in fact, he was made of sterner stuff than Coleridge and proved his capacity to face the facts of a world which, to the poet and philosopher, was an unsubstantial vision. In estimating the influence of early memories and friendships upon Lamb's work, it is impossible to overlook his connection with his mother's native county Hertford. His grandmother, Mrs Field, was housekeeper at Blakesware, a large country house in the parish of Widford, four miles east of Ware. The Plumers, its owners, lived principally at Gilston, some miles away, and left Blakesware in charge of Mrs Field. Charles and Mary Lamb spent many holidays here, roaming freely through the deserted mansion. In the autumn of 1799, Lamb revisited the place and wrote to Southey of the tapestried bedroom and the old 'marble hall, with Hogarth's prints, and the Roman Caesars in marble hung round,' of the wilderness and the village churchyard by the park gates, 'where the bones of my honoured grandam lie.' Mary Lamb described the house and recalled a childish experience of her own in The Young Mahometan, one of the tales in Mrs Leicester's School. The power of Blakesware upon Lamb's growing imagination is drawn in Blakesmoor in H shire, where we see him sitting in the window-seat of the store-room, reading Cowley, wandering through the house and creeping into the haunted room, 'but always in the daytime, with a passion of fear,' so fascinated by 'the boundaries of his Eden,' that he was ignorant of what lay beyond, and fancied the brook which ran outside the park, 'half hid by trees,' to be a romantic lake. In Dream-Children, Blakesware is again described, with its empty rooms, gardens, orangery and fish-pond; his grandmother, bowed down physically with wasting disease but unbowed in spirit, rises before his memory; he recalls her special affection for his elder brother John, 'so handsome and spirited a youth, and a king to the rest of us.' A more shadowy reminiscence is the fair-haired Alice, who lies buried in Widford churchyard, connected in thought with the portrait of the Hertfordshire beauty which 'hung next the great bay-window' and was the subject of Mary Lamb's stanzas to 'High-born Helen.' 'The green plains of pleasant Hertfordshire' supplied a life-long attraction to Lamb, from the days when, a boy at school, he attempted to trace the New River to its source, to the long walks of later years, when he roamed about Enfield or, with Mary Lamb and Barron Field, made his pilgrimage from St Albans to the home of his relations atviii] Early Friendships, Mary Lamb

I83

Mackery End. It was in these quiet byways that he found his true point of contact with nature; and the placid grace which dispenses its charm amid the parks and woods, grass-bordered lanes and open greens, of Hertfordshire is not unlike the tranquil beauty, never far from poetry, of his prose. Lamb left Christ's hospital in 1789, and, two years later, obtained a temporary appointment in the examiner's office in the South-Sea house, which he held from September 1791 to February 1792. This dignified establishment, in the unexacting service of which his brother John spent his life, is described in the first essay of Elia. In April 1792, he entered a scene of greater activity in the East India house in Leadenhall street, where, for thirty-three years, he performed his daily duties. In this year, Samuel Salt died and the Lamb family left the Temple, to settle eventually at 7 Little Queen street, Holborn. Between 1792 and 1796, the friendship with Coleridge continued, and Coleridge fathered Lamb's earliest sonnet, which was printed under the initials S.T.C. in The Morning Chronicle of 29 December 1794. Bowles, 'genius of the sacred fountain of tears,' was the inspirer of this and other sonnets, which, by May 1796, had reached the number of nine. Four of these were published in Coleridge's Poems on Various Subjects in 1796, and another, addressed to Mary Lamb, is contained in the earliest of the letters to Coleridge which has been preserved. This sonnet was written in a lunatic asylum at Hoxton, where Lamb spent the six weeks at the end of 1795 and the beginning of 1796. There was insanity in his family, which was soon to declare itself tragically; but this was the only occasion on which Lamb himself was affected by it, and the cause which disturbed him so seriously can only be conjectured. The correspondence with Coleridge, extending from May 1796 to June 1798, has its moments of playfulness, but is overcast by the melancholy of one who feels himself solitary. Old schoolfellows, however, occasionally came to see him, among them James White, whom he assisted in the authorship of The Falstaff Letters; and he improved his acquaintance with the scholarly and unpractical George Dyer, twenty years his elder. The letters are full of allusions to his reading, chiefly among old English authors, and contain much criticism of Coleridge's early verse, especially of Religious Musings, to the fineness, and to the inequality, of which Lamb showed himself fully alive. He advocated unitarianism and expressed admiration for Priestley with a fervour which, although it declined in later years, gave permanent colourI84

Lamb

[CH.

to his religious convictions, so far as we can gain any glimpse of them. For a time, however, the consolations of religion were foremost in his mind. His mother had, for some time, been helpless and dependent upon the care of her daughter. On 22 September 1796, Mary had a sudden fit of insanity, in which she killed her mother. She was removed to a private asylum at Islington, and Charles and his father went to 45 Chapel street, Pentonville. Sarah Lamb, an aunt who lived with the family, was taken into the house of a rich relation, but soon returned to her brother and nephew, dying early in 1797. Lamb, thus, in his twenty-third year, had 'the whole weight of the family' thrown on him-a father in his second childhood, a dying aunt and a sister whose returning reason was liable to fail again at any moment. John, the elder brother, though possessed of many good qualities, was wrapped up in his own affairs. It would have been easy to have taken his advice and consigned Mary permanently to a madhouse; but Charles preferred to make a home for his sister. During her father's lifetime, rooms were found for her at Hackney. Here, Charles spent his Sundays and holidays, and, when their father died in 1799, she took up her abode permanently with her brother, leaving him only when the threatenings of recurrent attacks of insanity made it necessary. In 1796 began the association between Coleridge and Charles Lloyd, a sensitive young Birmingham quaker; and, in January 1797, Lloyd unexpectedly sought Lamb out in London. Lamb, still suffering from a sense of loneliness and neglect, conceived a strong attachment for his friend's disciple. To the second edition of Coleridge's Poems (October 1797) were added poems by Lamb and Lloyd; and in 1798 appeared a small volume of Blank Verse, by Charles Lloyd and Charles Lamb, to which Lamb contributed seven poems, including The Old Familiar Faces, one of the most perfect expressions in English of infinite regret tempered by resignation. Friendship with Lloyd meant much pleasant literary intercourse, and from one particular branch of literature to which Lloyd introduced him Lamb learned a sympathy with quakerism and its staid reliance upon 'the inward light' as the source of intellectual peace, a sympathy which never left him. Lloyd, however, was not the best companion for a man in need of bracing society. Lamb early discovered in him 'an exquisiteness of feeling' which 'must border on derangement,' and, a year after his first visit, found himself on the brink of aVIII]

Charles and Robert Lloyd

I85

quarrel, for which, however, he blamed his own impatience at Lloyd's well-meant devotion. Coleridge, meanwhile, had somewhat tired of Lloyd, and a growing coolness developed into open rupture. In Edmund Oliver, a novel published in 1798, Lloyd vented some of his feeling against Coleridge, and by this time his wounded vanity had effected a breach between Coleridge and Lamb. He told Lamb-inexcusably, even if it were true-that Coleridge had said, 'Poor Lamb! if he wants any knowledge, he may apply to me.' Lamb's retort to this was Theses quaedam theologicae, enclosed in a letter written in June 1798. For once in their friendship, Lamb showed himself the weaker man of the two. His Theses, clever as they are, might have led to the permanent sundering of a friendship as salutary to Coleridge as it was inspiring to Lamb, had not Coleridge magnanimously overlooked the affront. Within little more than a year, they were again friends. In the interval, Lamb had probably seen more than enough of Charles Lloyd. In January 1799, a younger brother, Robert, who had rebelled against the quaker traditions of his family, sought refuge with Lamb from his father's supposed persecution. To this amiable youth, whose chief fault was a readiness to manufacture his own troubles, Lamb addressed a number of letters, one or two of them among the best that he wrote. Lamb recognised him as 'the flower of his family,' and his early death was a source of deep grief to a household which, in spite of disagreements, was united by close bonds of affection. In later years, Lamb sent criticisms to the father of the Lloyds upon his verse translations of classical authors; but the friendship with Charles Lloyd gradually ceased. Lloyd's sensitiveness grew upon him with years: he became a prey to nervous melancholy and died near Versailles in 1839, with his reason hopelessly overclouded. Lamb's first independent work in prose, A Tale of Rosamund Gray and Old Blind Margaret, was published in the summer of 1798. Already, as we have seen, he had had some share in White's Original Letters, etc., of Sir John Falstaf in July 1796. Rosamund Gray, told in simple prose interwoven with literary phrase, remembered and appropriated from his reading, is a sombre and tragic narrative. In its theme of undeserved misfortune overtaking the young and innocent, Lamb had his own experiences in mind. The resignation of Allan Clare, the survivor of his elder sister and his dead love, is uttered by Lamb himself.i86

Lamb

[CH.

I gave my heart to the Purifier, and my will to the Sovereign Will of the Universe. The irresistible wheels of destiny passed on in their everlasting rotation,-and I suffered myself to be carried along with them without complaining. The scene of the story is Widford; Blakesware, the home of Allan and Elinor Clare, is visited in memory by the narrator; and in the ill-fated Rosamund is bodied forth the Alice of Elia. In Elinor, whose relation to Allan resembles that of Mary Lamb to Charles, there is a reminiscence of 'high-born Helen'; and it is at her grave, not at that of Rosamund, that Allan and his friend meet again. Thus, Lamb showed his capacity of transmuting his pleasures and sorrows into forms of imagination and of treading the border-line between truth and fiction with an unmatched delicacy. Even in his melancholy, he could not fail to reproduce something of the double aspect of life; and occasional gentle touches of amused observation prove his power of balancing and reconciling the comic and tragic elements in human nature. To Southey, Lamb's principal correspondent at this period, he wrote, on 29 October 1798, in a letter which throws some light upon the composition of Rosamund Gray, that he was at work 'upon something, which, if I were to cut away and garble, perhaps I might send you an extract or two that might not displease you.' This was the tragedy first called Pride's Cure, but, in its revised form, John Woodvil. Although without great original merit or dramatic interest, it bears witness to Lamb's faithful study of the early Elizabethan drama, in its phraseology, in the varying length and broken rhythm of its lines and in the alternation of verse with prose. Lamb showed two fragments, one of which was afterwards published separately, to George Dyer, whose classical taste 'could not comprehend how that could be poetry which did not go upon ten feet.' 'I go,' he wrote again to Southey (20 May 1799), 'upon the model of Shakspeare in my Play, and endeavour after a colloquial ease and spirit, something like him.' The style, while frequently recalling that of Shakespeare's historical plays, is closely akin to that of such dramas as Arden of Feversham, founded on English subjects and preserving, with occasional exaltation of phrase, a general homeliness of diction. In these pursuits, Lamb gradually shook off his melancholy. To his life with Mary in Pentonville belong those reminiscences afterwards recorded in Old China-the little luxuries permitted by a scanty income, the holiday walks to Potter's bar, Waltham and Enfield, the folio Beaumont and Fletcher carried home oneVIII]

Contributions to Newspapers

I87

Saturday night from Covent garden, the purchase of the print from Leonardo which Lamb called 'Lady Blanch,' the visits to the shilling gallery of the theatre. The play, pictures and old English literature above all, became the three objects of Lamb's enthusiasm, relieving his mind after his daily routine and alleviating the anxiety inseparable from his affection for Mary. In December 1799, he made a new and valuable friend. On a visit to Charles Lloyd at Cambridge, he met Thomas Manning, a mathematician of Caius, versatile and laughter-loving. Their correspondence produced a series of letters full of Lamb's peculiar humour. Cambridge also held George Dyer of Emmanuel, whose oddity and touching simplicity were a microcosm of the eternal contradictions of life in which Lamb delighted. Into Oxford in the Vacation, with its disclosure of his attraction towards the universities whose privileges he had been unable to share, Lamb interwove memories of Cambridge and introduced the portrait of Dyer in the library of his college. His first visit to Oxford took place in the summer of 1800, when he passed two days with the family of Matthew Gutch, a law-stationer in London. Gutch had offered him a lodging at 34 Southampton buildings, Chancery lane, and here he settled with Mary in the late summer of 1800. His literary work during the next few years was desultory. In March 1800, Coleridge had spent some weeks with him in Pentonville and suggested to him to contribute to a newspaper an imitation of Burton's Anatomy, which bore fruit in the three Curious Fragments printed with John Woodvil in 1802. In the same volume were also printed the lines called Hypochondriacus, composed about this time, which show an appreciation of Burton's melancholy not less remarkable than the prose fragments in reproduction of his style. These first attempts at writing for newspapers were not accepted, which is hardly surprising. Lamb, meanwhile, was increasing his acquaintance. His lodgings in Southampton buildings were so crowded by visitors that they resembled a 'minister's levee,' and, at Lady day 1801, he found it convenient to seek new quarters in the attic story of 16 Mitre court buildings, in the Temple. He obtained a footing on The Albion, which ended in August 1801, and then, after a short connection with The IMorning Chronicle, worked for The Morning Post from 1802 to 1804. His contributions to these journals were, for the most part, ephemeral; his most remarkable feat was an epigram upon the apostasy of Sir James Mackintosh from radicalism, which proved the death-blow of The Albion.i88

Lamb

[CH.

Newspapers Thirty-five years ago contains a record, with some confusion of facts and dates, of this period, and an amusing specimen of the consciously laboured humour with which Lamb sought to enliven The Morning Post. His journalistic life brought him into contact with a somewhat different order of friends, 'men of boisterous spirits, sitters up a-nights, disputants, drunken,' who 'yet seemed to have something noble about them.' One of them, John Fenwick, the editor of The Albion, lives in Elia as Ralph Bigod, the representative of 'the great race' of men who borrow. In their society, figuring as 'a profest joker,' Lamb certainly confirmed a taste for 'tipple and tobacco,' and a habit of sitting up into the small hours, which were a disadvantage to his nervous temperament; but he also widened his views of human nature and learned to forget his troubles, or, at any rate, to see them in their true proportions. John Woodvil was published early in 1802 with the complement of Curious Fragments from Burton, Mary Lamb's 'High-born Helen' and a few other pieces. In the summer of the same year, the Lambs visited Coleridge at Greta hall. The sunset as they drove from Penrith and the view from Skiddaw, with other pleasant experiences, satisfied Lamb 'that there is such a thing as that which tourists call romantic, which I very much suspected before'; but he came to the sensible conclusion that 'Fleet Street and the Strand are better places to live in for good and all than amidst Skiddaw.' The landmarks of the next few years are scanty-a visit to the isle of Wight in 1803, an attack of depression early in 1805 and a return of Mary's illness in the following summer. With her recovery, Lamb's spirits rose, and, early in 1806, he submitted his farce Mr H - for production on the stage. In May 1806, he suffered a serious loss in the departure of Manning for China. But, new work and interests helped to atone for the withdrawal of Manning's 'steadiness and quiet, which used to infuse something like itself into our nervous minds.' The friendship of Wordsworth and his sister afforded that calm sympathy of which the Lambs stood much in need; the society of John Rickman, whose accomplishments, as 'a pleasant hand,' Lamb had discovered in 1800, of Martin Burney and others, was near at hand; and Hazlitt, the future husband of Mary Lamb's friend, Sarah Stoddart, quickened his love of art. In a farewell letter to Manning (10 May 1806), he described the beginning of Tales from Shakespear, undertaken at the recommendation of William Godwin, whom Lamb liked as cordially asVIII]

Tales from Shakespear

I89

he detested Godwin's second wife. Mary charged herself with the adaptation of twenty plays of Shakespeare 'for the Use of Young Persons': Lamb himself had finished Othello and Macbeth when he wrote to Manning, and contributed four more tales to the ultimate collection, of which the remaining fourteen were by Mary. Before the appearance of this classic in January 1807, Lamb's venture in farce was tried publicly and failed. It was accepted in June 1806 at Drury lane, and was produced on 10 December, with Elliston in the title r6le. Its point is the preservation by Mr H- of his anonymity, in order to secure a bride whom his real name Hogsflesh will disgust. By a slip of the tongue, he discloses his name prematurely; but, the danger to his happiness is removed by the timely arrival of a licence empowering him to change his name to Bacon. The thinness of the subject is ill disguised by Lamb's gift of punning, to which it gave some opportunity. The author, a just critic of his own work, joined in hissing it and bore his mortification stoically. Although he now and then returned to dramatic writing, he never produced another play on the boards. Tales from Shakespear have had a very different fate. They belong to a type of literature requiring gifts which are seldom found in perfect proportion. The tale must attract the reader for its own sake; but its object is missed unless it attracts him further to study its source. In this case, the task was all the more difficult because the originals are the highest achievements of dramatic poetry. Shakespeare's language had to be interwoven with the story and demanded a selection of phrase which would arrest a young reader's attention without overtaxing his intelligence. The familiarity with old literature which Mary had acquired in Samuel Salt's book-closet and Charles had improved in the library at Blakesware stood them in good stead. They were still able to bring to the plays the impressions of childhood, to reproduce in simple prose the phrases that had awakened their imaginations and to supply that commentary upon characters and incidents which a child needs, without over-burdening the easy narrative. It is not too much to say that the collection forms one of the most conspicuous landmarks in the history of the romantic movement. It is the first book which, appealing to a general audience and to a rising generation, made Shakespeare a familiar and popular author and, in so doing, asserted the claims of the older literature which, to English people at large, was little more than a name. The Adventures of Ulysses, written by Lamb aloneIgo

Lamb

[CH.

and published by Godwin in 1808, was a further experiment in the same direction, founded upon Chapman's translation of the Odyssey, and suggested by the popularity of Fenelon's Aventures de Td6maque. In the qualities of simple style and narrative, it is a worthy successor to Tales from Shakespear. It has not achieved, however, an equal reputation. While Tales fron Shakespear is drawn directly from an original source abounding in human interest, The Adventures of Ulysses is an attempt to familiarise readers with a poem which, with all its beauty and vigour, is merely a reflection, often disturbed and imperfect, of the special qualities of the Odyssey. Apart from purely literary considerations, both books are a valuable testimony to the purity and simplicity of Lamb's character. The bright visions of youth were still strong enough to chase the shades of the prison-house which had threatened Lamb's early manhood. Further, Mary Lamb's contributions to Tales from Shakespear prove that her sound judgment, in the normal state of her reason, was not a mere figment of an affectionate brother's imagination. At the close of 1808, Lamb conferred a remarkable boon upon students of our older authors by the publication of Specimens oj English Dramatic Poets, who lived About the Time of Shakspeare. The selections, covering the whole field of the English drama from Gorboduc to Shirley, discharge the proper office of selections in that, chosen, as they were, with the fullest discrimination, they whet the appetite for more of the same dish. Lamb's judiciously brief comments are among the classics of English criticism. He had the enthusiasm of the discoverer and, here and there, allowed it to obscure his critical faculty. Admiration of the scene in which Calantha, in Ford's Broken Heart, 'with holy violence against her nature,' continues to dance while news of successive tragedies are whispered into her ear, tempted him into a comparison out of all proportion to the actual merits of the episode. Yet, the self-sacrifice of Ordella, in Fletcher's Thierry and Theodoret, that 'piece of sainted nature' whom, next to Calantha, he reckoned 'the most perfect notion of the female heroic character,' seemed to him 'faint and languid' as compared with Shakespeare at his best, and formed the basis for just remarks upon Fletcher's fondness for 'unnatural and violent situations' and the artificiality of his versification and wit. Equally just are the sparing praise of Middleton's overlauded drama, The Witch, and the intuitive recognition of the passion which finds an imperfectly articulate outlet in the plays and translations of Chapman. The thought of Shakespeare isVIII]

Mrs Leicester's School

I9I

always present. Heywood is 'a sort of prose Shakspeare,' with his feeling, but without his command of expression; Chapman 'perhaps approaches nearest to Shakspeare in the descriptive and didactic, in passages which are less purely dramatic.' The funeral dirge in Webster's White Devil challenges comparison with 'Full fathom five' in The Tempest: 'as that is of the water, watery; so this is of the earth, earthy.' Shakespearean reminiscence pervades the style of these notes; Lamb constantly seeks comparisons from the greatest of dramatists and finds in his words a never-failing source of apt expression. At its best, as in the notes on Webster, his prose becomes lyric, with a pregnancy of phrase that leaves a peculiarly vivid impression of the characteristics which it illustrates. In Mrs Leicester's School, which was nearly contemporary with Specimens, Mary Lamb had the principal share. Lamb himself contributed three of the ten stories, anecdotes of childhood supposed to be related by the pupils of a ladies' school at Amwell in Hertfordshire and reduced to writing by one of their teachers. Autobiography enters largely into these charming stories: in The Young Mahometan, Mary wrote down her memories of Blakesware and recorded her own childish perversion to Mohammedanism, caused by one of Samuel Salt's miscellaneous collection of books, while, in the Visit to the Cousins, she recalled a child's first impressions of the play and its interest in the figures which struck the quarters upon the clock of St Dunstan's, and introduced her young heroine to the Juvenile library in Skinner street, paying, with sly humour, an incidental tribute to the persuasive powers of Mrs Godwin. The Witch Aunt was founded by Lamb upon a reminiscence to which he referred later in Witches and other Night Fears, and First Going to Church blends memories of the Temple church with Coleridge's youth at Ottery St Mary. The bells of Ottery, whose identity Lamb veiled later under the disguise of 'sweet Calne in Wiltshire,' had already made their music heard in John Woodvil. With Mrs Leicester's School and the artless rimes of Poetry for Children, tales and apologues in which the moral element, sugared with humour and softened by pathos, plays a large part, the joint work of the brother and sister came to an end. Prince Dorus, a fairy-tale in decasyllabic couplets, published by Mrs Godwin in 1811, was Lamb's last work for children. On 27 May 1809, the Lambs moved into new quarters at 4 Inner Temple lane, after a short return to Southampton buildings. The anxiety of the move brought on one of Mary's attacks, and,192

Lamb

[CH.

in the autumn, he took her to visit the Hazlitts at Winterslow, where she recovered health, and they had long walks to Wilton, Salisbury and Stonehenge-Wilton, with its treasures of painting and sculpture, characteristically taking the first place in Lamb's enumeration of these excursions. The visit was renewed in the following summer, but with less satisfaction; the return journey was made by way of Oxford and Blenheim, and thence to Bury St Edmunds, and ended in Mary's serious relapse, which clouded the early autumn of 1810. Meanwhile, Lamb found pleasure in his two sitting-rooms on the third floor of the house in Inner Temple lane, the print-room hung with the works of Hogarth and the book-room with its 'small but well-chosen library.' In these rooms, the resort of Martin Burney and the 'card-boys' and of other friends who gathered round him in the evenings when his work at the India house was over, he spent some eight years. His letters during this period include a number addressed to Wordsworth, crowded with critical and humourous obiter dicta and appreciation of his correspondent's poems. His life was chequered by moments of sadness, but his earlier depression vanished; he could even speak lightly of the trouble which brooded over his house and say that 'the wind is tempered to the shorn Lambs.' Outer events touched him but little: there are allusions in his letters to the Napoleonic catastrophe in 1814 and 1815, but they are those of a mere spectator of the drama. His catholicity of temperament allowed him to preserve his friendship with the poets whose revolutionary sympathies had been transformed into conservatism, while he was able to extend it to Hazlitt and Leigh Hunt at the opposite pole of radicalism. 'What any man can write,' he wrote to Wordsworth in 1815, 'surely I may read.' This principle, mutatis mutandis, applies to his choice of friends. Small in volume as his work was between 1810 and 1820, it is the work of one whose power of conversation and faculty of criticism were felt by all who came into contact with him. His natural shyness and an impediment in his speech prevented him, even if he had wished it, from dominating a literary circle; but, his sound good sense, abundant sympathy and whimsical gaiety of utterance gave him peculiar influence with his friends. His own highest achievements were yet to come. When he began to write for Leigh Hunt in The Reflector in 1810, he had had comparatively little experience in essay-writing. Casual criticism in letter-writing is another thing; and the masterly estimate ofVIII] Lamb's Humour 193 Jeremy Taylor, in one of his letters to Robert Lloyd, is marked by considerably more freedom and liveliness than are the valuable, but somewhat laboured, articles in The Reflector upon The Genius and Character of Hogarth and The Tragedies of Shakespeare. His genius, however, for apt illustration of his favourite authors, was again proved in Specimens from the Writings of Fuller printed in the same periodical at the end of 1811; and the passages of Table-Talk contributed to The Examiner in 1813 have the same brief and pregnant character. The review of Wordsworth's Excursion in The Quarterly for October 1814 was mangled by Gifford to the injury of what, in Lamb's own and Mary's opinions, was 'the prettiest piece of prose I ever writ.' Distinct from his critical essays at this time are the humourous letters, modelled upon the pattern of The Tatler and The Spectator, which Lamb wrote for The Reflector in 1810 and 1811. Such essays as that On the Inconveniences Resulting from being Hanged are specimens of a humour which, amusing enough in the warmth of conversation, sparkles less brightly in print. His humour needed the touch of personal reminiscence, the softening of laughter by the wistful memory of the past. This vein is hardly touched in Recollections of Christ's Hospital, printed in The Gentleman's Magazine for June 1813, which, with a foretaste of that gift of portraiture which enlivens many pages of Elia, is serious and matter-of-fact. For the present, his written humour took a serio-comic direction, playing with grim subjects and identifying itself with imaginary topics. There is, however, one notorious exception which, founded, to some extent, upon his own experience, has had a baneful effect upon estimates of his character. Confessions of a Drunkard, printed in The Philanthropist for June 1813, pictures, in moving terms, the misery of a slave to drink and tobacco. Its object was, undoubtedly, serious, and it is equally certain that Lamb traced in it the progress of his own undeniable affection for these accompaniments of his evenings, with some genuine regret, corroborated by his letters, that he was not superior to their seductions. But he was capable, even for a serious purpose, of using his imagination to describe sensations and sentiments which, as a matter of fact, were an exaggeration of his own. At all times, the incidents of his life became stories in which he played at will with his own personality. Confessions of a Drunkard was reprinted in The London Magazine for August 1822, when Elia was at the height of his magic powers, and was able to jest ruefully to Dorothy Wordsworth upon the warnings of

E. L. XII. CH. VIII.

13194 Lamb [CH. rheumatism against his favourite beverages. In 1821, De Quincey had published Confessions of an Opium Eater in the same magazine, embroidering fancy upon fact with portentous seriousness; and it is in keeping with Lamb's spirit of mischief that he should have furbished up his old essay in the following year to mystify his readers with an avowal in marked contrast to the tone of those impenitent disclosures. His annoyance at the gratuitous assumption of The Quarterly that the essay was 'a genuine description of the state of the writer' amounts to a denial. At the end of 1817, the Lambs, as Mary wrote to Dorothy Wordsworth, 'mustered up resolution enough' to leave their chambers in the Temple for lodgings over a brazier's shop at 20 Russell street, Covent garden, 'a place all alive with noise and bustle; Drury Lane Theatre in sight from our front, and Covent Garden from our back windows.' This congenial position atoned for the final severance of their connection with their earliest home. The 'divine plain face' of the actress Fanny Kelly began to fill Lamb's thoughts. Apart from the romance of his boyhood, and an attraction, commemorated in the touching lyric Hester, to the unknown quakeress Hester Savory, during his life at Pentonville, his mind had been singularly free from thoughts of love. In July 1819, he proposed marriage to Miss Kelly in a letter of great beauty and dignity of feeling; she refused him with equal candour and respect, and he bore his disappointment with exemplary fortitude. The collected WorkCs of Charles Lamzb, dedicated to Coleridge and containing John Woodvil, Mr H -, Rosamund Gray, a collection of poems and sonnets and such essays as he thought worthy of republication, was published in two volumes by the brothers Ollier in 18181. From the date of the publication of these volumes until August 1820, Lamb wrote with some regularity for The Examiner and, after its decease, for The Indicator, also edited by Leigh Hunt. To this same period belong kindly reviews of two books of verse by friends, the Nugae Canorae of Charles Lloyd and Barron Field's First Fruits of Australian Poetry, both in The Exami ner, and a review of Keats's Lamia and its companion pieces. Barron Field, the companion of the Lambs in their excursion to Mackery End, had gone to New South Wales as chief judge of the supreme court. Of the two poems which Field printed for private circulation, the first was characterised by Lamb as containing too much evidence of the unlicensed borrowing which had An analysis of their contents will be found in the bibliography to the present chapter.VIII]

The Essays of Elia

I95

helped to colonise Botany bay. To the second, The Kangaroo, which he quoted at length, he gave more praise: he was 'mistaken, if it does not relish of the graceful hyperboles of the elder writers'-a perhaps excessive compliment, which might be suspected of having a double edge if it had not been repeated less ambiguously at a later date. The London Magazine of August 1820 contained Recollections of the South-Sea House, the first of the miscellaneous essays which bore the signature Elia. From October 1820 to the end of 1823, Elia was a regular contributor to this brilliant but shortlived journal. It was a happy thought which led him to seek material for his first essay in his own reminiscences; for it was in the contemplation of these and the weaving of romance into their fabric that he found his true style. He told his publisher, John Taylor, that he adopted the sobriquet Elia out of regard for the feelings of his brother John, still a clerk in the South-Sea house and readily annoyed by trifles. The original Elia was an Italian with literary tastes whom Lamb remembered as a clerk in the service of the company; his death was almost contemporaneous with the borrowing of his name for these essays. Their success was immediate. Lamb was no new writer, and the authorship soon became an open secret; but the charm of the anonymous writer who lavished the treasures of his humour and sympathy easily and confidentially, talking with his readers from a standpoint entirely free from condescension, won its way for its own sake. At the end of 1822, the larger number of the essays were collected for publication in a separate volume. The second series of essays did not appear until 1833, long after Lamb's connection with The London had ceased. From what has been said in the course of this chapter it will be seen that a large portion of Lamb's biography can be written from the essays. His subject was humanity at large, but, in himself, he saw its microcosm. Using his own impressions and recollections as a text for his work, he wrote without a trace of egotism or self-assertion. To himself, he was one of a crowd, sympathising with its most ordinary pleasures and sorrows. His natural humility precluded any consciousness of a mission to teach; he had not even the ambition to formulate a philosophy of life. Among his friends were reckoned many whose example might have fostered this ambition; but, in dedicating himself to the common duties of daily life, he had learned the lesson of selfeffacement and that sanity of outlook which defends its possessor 13-2I96

Lamb

[CH.

from the misfortune of taking himself too seriously. Subjective though his essays are in the sense that they deal largely with himself and his doings, his personality did not project itself so as to bend everything within its reach into the shape of its idiosyncrasies: it was a receptive surface which reflected the ordinary life of the world, with added light and colour. Quickly sensitive to the cloud and sunshine of the moods that chased each other across it, Lamb's mind identified itself completely with its subject, and his style is tremulously alive to the smallest variations of the chequered pageant of life. Its prevailing intellectual quality is humour. Few writers, since Shakespeare gave life with equal sympathy to Hamlet and to Falstaff, have understood so fully as Lamb the intertwining of the ludicrous and pathetic elements in human nature. Their apparent opposition was not merely reconciled by him into a complementary relation. He wedded them into close identity; apprehension and sorrow were familiar elements of his own life, but the cheerful genius of laughter was ever ready to recall him to his sense of proportion. His nervous tendency to laugh at a funeral was, in no small degree, the result of his innate sense of contrast. The extravagant side of his humour appears in his inveterate love of punning and in some incidents of his life in which a fastidious critic might hold him guilty of a leaning to horse-play. But he himself disclaimed the reputation of 'a profest joker'; and the humour of Elia is an even mixture of tenderness and playfulness. His lighter moods are subdued by an undertone of pathos; where he writes in sadness, a sudden thought sheds a transfiguring gaiety upon his work. 'The tender grace of a day that is dead' fills the essays which deal with his early recollections and suffuses the portraits which they contain. Yet, the lighter side of the subject is not forgotten; his portraits are lively representations of their subjects, as the world, and not only the son, brother, or friend saw them. The mingled affection and amusement with which Lamb regarded George Dyer, and described his misadventure in the canal at Islington, is a conspicuous example of the inseparable union of laughter and pathos in his nature and style. If, however, tender sentiment plays a large part in his humour, the reputation of the 'gentle Charles' was not to his liking. Pure mischief was as strong in him as sympathy, and, like Ariel, he found pleasure in dazzling his spectators with illusions. It was quite compatible with his genuine respect for Dyer's unworldliness to poke fun at it. Even Coleridge could be reminded that hisVIII]

The Essays of Elia

197

juvenile harangues may have given as much amusement as admiration to the humourist who listened to them. The wanton love of playing with his reader is constantly exercised in an adroit mixture of fact with fiction. The groundwork of Lamb's reminiscences is habitually true, but there is always an undefinable point at which the superstructure becomes purely imaginary. Dates are altered and the order of incidents reversed. In Christ's Hospital, he speaks, for a time, in the accents of Coleridge and in contradiction to his own earlier recollections; but, before the essay is done, he takes a third shape to address the shape which he has just quitted-and all this without the least awkwardness or display of mechanism. Sometimes, Lamb may have had a solid reason for these Protean tricks of fancy; but their chief ground is natural love for make-believe. With the inborn habit of turning reality into romance, he combined the delectable passion for throwing dust in the eyes of the serious person to whom the identity of Elia was of more concern than the matter of his essays. All this-the wide sympathy, the blending of tears and laughter, the freakishness of Elia-must, by themselves, have given peculiar charm to his style. But its magic is enhanced by its purely literary quality. Lamb's study of the older English authors bred in him that love of quaint turns of phrase and obsolete words which, in writers of less humour, often becomes a disagreeable mannerism. This archaism, however, lending itself well to Lamb's demure type of humour, was no mere decoration, but part and parcel of his style. The language of his favourite authors, closely woven into the texture of his mind, found its way without an effort into his prose, where, transmuted by his alchemy, it was issued under a new and authentic coinage. Quotations abound in the two volumes of Elia, and their text, probably, contains many less conspicuous reminiscences of sentences and phrases which have been left unnoticed or unidentified. Whole passages are cast in forms which recall the manner of the early seventeenthcentury prose writers. In Sir Thomas Browne, Lamb found the spirit of the past most nearly akin to his own, with its active curiosity as to the mysteries of life and death, and the zest with which its dignity amused itself with trifles. Thus, the solemn cadences and Latinised constructions of New Year's Eve and some of the Popular Fallacies, a title which at once recalls Pseudodoxia Epidemica, are full of echoes of Hydriotaphia and The Garden of Cyrus. With this ready faculty of imitating the music of the past, Lamb used singular licence in appropriating its actual198

Lamb

[CH.

strains. The act of borrowing a happy phrase that occurred to him unbidden did not involve the necessity of verification. The words in their new context became his own, and the elusiveness with which he cloaked his fortunate thefts is part of his charm. 'What a misfortune,' he wrote to Bernard Barton, 'to have a Lying memory!' This exclamation forms part of an apology, more humourous than rueful, for inventing a quotation from George Fox. If, in this case, his memory played him false, it is equally certain that he indulged now and then in deliberate invention. In The Two Races of Men, for example, there are three lines of blank verse for which the inquisitive student will turn with some confidence to the Stewart dramatists and find his trouble unrewarded. Lamb, with rare good sense, never yielded to the temptation of devoting himself wholly to literature. The India house, whatever drudgery he may have felt in its service, provided him with a welcome mainstay. 'There is corn in Egypt, while there is cash at Leadenhall.' He spent his holidays with Mary, sometimes on the south coast, sometimes with friends at Cambridge and elsewhere. In 1822, they visited Paris, where Talma supped with Lamb, but the exertion proved too much for Mary. In the summer of 1823, they removed from Russell street to a six-roomed cottage in Colebrook row, Islington. The New river, the scene of George Dyer's exploit in the following November, flowed in front of the house: at the back was a garden 'to delight the heart of old Alcinous.' Lamb felt 'like a great Lord, never having had a house before.' This comparative retirement did not mean loss of friends; he felt himself 'oppressed with business all day and Company all night,' and complained of the want of privacy in the first of the short papers contributed to The New Times in 1825, under the signature 'Lepus,' the 'hare with many friends.' The most important of his letters during this period were addressed to Bernard Barton, his correspondence with whom began in September 1822. Barton, a prolific writer of verse which displays sincere emotion and susceptibility to the charm of places, but seldom rises above respectable mediocrity, was clerk in a bank at Woodbridge in Suffolk. He was a quaker, and it might seem that his steady, serious mind had little in common with Lamb's moods of extravagant gaiety. Lamb, however, had a strong admiration for the type of character fostered by quakerism, which, combined with amusement at the rigid business qualities of the sect, is declared in A Quaker's Meeting, and was expressed inVIII] His Frien dships 199 the sombre neatness of the dress which he affected in his mature years. The friendship of 'B. B.' proved a consoling and steadying influence during the trying years when declining health began to tell upon him and the periods of Mary's insanity became longer. Barton, on his side, owed Lamb a debt of gratitude for the advice to keep to his profession instead of devoting himself to literature. Of the two men, Barton was thirteen years the younger; occasionally shocked at his mercurial correspondent's wit, he was evidently receptive-a fact we should hardly infer from his poetryto Lamb's jests and puns; and Lamb wrote to him with a gusto which would have been impossible had he been scattering his treasures fruitlessly. The short memoir of Barton by his neighbour and son-in-law, Edward FitzGerald, does full justice to his quiet, unostentatious character, his sound judgment and the sincerity of his verse. Another correspondent of this period was Thomas Allsop, whose long life was spent in the service of an extreme type of radicalism. In the society of men like Allsop, Hazlitt and Hunt, Lamb's wide tolerance led him to condone what his strong practical sense may have condemned. For the radical poets, he had little liking. He met Shelley once and found his voice 'the most obnoxious squeak I ever was tormented with,' and his reflections on Shelley's death, in a hastily written letter to Barron Field, might have been those of one whom the poet's atheism had blinded to his genius. While he enjoyed The Vision of Judgment and was angry at the trouble into which Hunt was brought by its publication, he confessed that Byron was to me offensive, and I never can make out his great power, which his admirers talk of... He was at best a Satyrist-in any other way he was mean enough. I daresay I do him injustice; but I cannot love him, nor squeeze a tear to his memory. His association, however, with radicals and free-thinkers was one cause of an expostulation by Southey, who, in 1823, remonstrated in The Quarterly with Elia upon the irreligious tone of certain passages in his work and referred incidentally to Hazlitt and Hunt, the bugbears of the conservative review. In The London Magazine for October, Elia responded with a long letter to his critic, in which he exposed his wounded feelings and defended the character of his friends. This letter is a vigorous piece of sustained prose; but the dignity of its tone is injured by its personal references to Southey. The laureate, however, was slow to take offence, and his answer to Lamb in a forbearing letter cleared up the200

Lamb

[CH.

misunderstanding. When The Last Essays of Elia was published, only the concluding portion of the letter was printed. This episode is one sign of the change which came over Lamb during the last decade of his life. He was approaching his fiftieth year. Through the greater part of 1824, he suffered from depression and nervous weakness, which led him to refer to himself as Tremulus or Tremebundus. His interest in The London Magazine began to decline. His daily work became irksome to him, and, on 29 March 1825, he 'came home for ever' from the India house, 'a freed man.' Out of a pension of ~450, ~9 a year was kept back as a provision for Mary in case of her survival. The relief and strangeness of his freedom were described in The Superannuated Man. 'Mary,' he wrote to Wordsworth, 'wakes every morning with an obscure feeling that some good has happened to us.' To one 'in wasted health and sore spirits,' this 'Hegira, or Flight from Leadenhall' was, at first, an unmixed blessing; but the enforced idleness which it produced was the cause of much mental unhappiness in Lamb's closing years. It was succeeded, in the summer of 1825, by a nervous fever, which afforded a subject for the essay called The Convalescent. In company with Allsop and his wife, the Lambs went into lodgings at Enfield during July and August. On his return to Islington, he was again ill, and Mary's reason succumbed to the strain. Nevertheless, 1825 was a productive year, and 1826 saw the appearance of Popular Fallacies, which contains some of Lamb's most ingenious, if more artificial, writing. In 1826, he was complaining of his health; his head was 'a ringing Chaos,' and it is evident that he had fears for his sanity. His connection with The London Magazine had ceased in 1825, and, in September 1826, he wrote to Barton that he had 'forsworn periodicals,' in some annoyance at Henry Colburn's dilatory treatment of his contributions to The New Monthly Magazine. He found some occupation in reading the Garrick plays at the British museum from ten to four daily: the extracts which he made from them were printed in Hone's Table Book throughout 1827. One consolation of these chequered years was the presence in their house of Emma Isola, the orphan daughter of Charles Isola, one of the esquire bedells of the university of Cambridge. They met her during one of their visits to a Cambridge friend, Mrs Paris; she came to them during her holidays from school, and was eventually adopted by them. In 1833, she married Edward Moxon the publisher. Meanwhile, in September 1827, Lamb,vIII]

His Later Lfe

201

who had found a welcome refuge from Islington in his summer visits to Enfield, took a house at Enfield known as Chase side, 'the snuggest, most comfortable house, with every thing most compact and desirable.' He found delight in the neighbourhood of his favourite Hertfordshire and in correspondence with, and occasional visits from, his friends. Bryan Waller Procter, George Darley, Talfourd, Vincent Novello and Henry Crabb Robinson are among those who shared his intimacy at this time, with Walter Wilson, the biographer of Defoe, and others with whom his friendship had ripened during his later residence in London. Occasionally, he went to London to draw his pension. Once, he dined at Talfourd's to meet Wordsworth, always his idol among contemporary poets. He brought home old books, including the works of Aquinas, which he lent to Coleridge in his retirement at Highgate. For some time, Mary had been able to remain at home during her long illnesses, but, for Lamb, these were periods of enforced solitude. In the summer of 1829, he was obliged to send her to Fulham, and he felt lonely and out of spirits. His pity was always for her; of himself, he seldom spoke without a touch of humour to relieve his melancholy. But his anxieties led him, in 1829, to seek lodgings with his neighbours, the Westwoods, 'the Baucis and Baucida of dull Enfield.' Thomas Westwood was a retired haberdasher, a person of some consequence in Enfield, who sang sea-songs at threescore-and-ten and had a single anecdote. With this worthy man, the Lambs remained till May 1833. Their cares, in 1830, were increased by the illness of Emma Isola, at Bury St Edmunds. Lamb, on her recovery, fetched her home; and it was on this journey that he escaped from the conversation of 'a wellinform'd man,' by answering his question, 'What sort of a crop of turnips do you think we shall have this year?' with the delightful retort, 'It depends, I believe, upon boiled legs of mutton.' The alternation between high spirits and despair at Mary's 'deplorable state' is painfully marked in the letters of this period. Westwood's house became, to him, 'a house of pest and age,' and, with the approaching marriage of Emma to Moxon, the situation became unbearable. In May 1833, he made his final move to a cottage in Church street, Edmonton, where a couple named Walden, who took in mental patients, arranged to lodge and board the brother and sister exclusively. The best of Lamb's prose work written at Enfield appeared, in 1833, in the second volume of Elia, which Moxon published. In June 1830, the same publisher had brought out a small volume of202

Lamb

[CH.

his fugitive verse under the title Album Verses. Instinctive delicacy of workmanship, sincere pathos and pure and artless emotion, give Lamb a unique place among those poets who, in occasional verse of an unpretentious order, offer, from time to time, a clear and unruffled reflection of 'the light that never was on sea and land.' Alone of his lyrics, The Old Familiar Faces, written under severe emotional stress, is immortal; but Album Verses contains a number of sonnets and simple lyrics whose charm, less compelling than the poetic prose of Dream-Children, nevertheless springs from the same fount of reminiscence and consciousness of the mingled pleasure and pain of mortal joys. His sense of poetic style reaches a climax in the chiming and haunting lines of the sonnet The Gipsy's Malison. Less 'curiously and perversely elaborate,' to use his own phrase, are the triplets In the Album of Lucy Barton and In His Own Album, and the pieces in octosyllabic couplets, in which he was indebted to Marvell and other seventeenth century poets and happily imitated their natural fluency. It is a characteristic of Lamb's humour that he could indulge in doggerel without producing that sense of incongruity which is often the fate of the lighter efforts of the great masters of poetry. Verses like the famous Going or Gone do not rise from the merely formal point of view above the plane of Keats's lines on Teignmouth or Oxford; but they are filled with pathos and a sense of the irrevocable, and the union of laughter and tears, conspicuous in Elia, is fully achieved in this simple piece of verse. Lamb's letters from his retirement at Edmonton refer with unabated interest to the chief alleviations of his life-books and pictures. He tells Cary, the translator of Dante, that, with the aid of his translation and Emma's knowledge of Italian, he and his sister have read the Inferno. These studies were interrupted by Emma's marriage in August 1833. On the evening of the wedding, Mary was restored to her senses, 'as if by an electrical stroke.' This was merely temporary. Lamb was content to be with her. When she is not violent, her rambling chat is better to me than the sense and sanity of this world. Her heart is obscured, not buried; it breaks out occasionally; and one can discern a strong mind struggling with the billows that have gone over it. Meanwhile, his brotherly devotion had undermined his health, and intemperance was overcoming his shattered nervous system. On this point, it is impossible to dwell too leniently. Lamb's habitual weakness was simply an incident in a life the key-note of which was the abandonment of selfish ease for a path ofVIII]

Summary

203

unusual difficulty, and it neither hardened his heart nor dimmed his intellect. It is probable that the death of Coleridge, in July 1834, was a blow from which he never recovered. On 21 November, he wrote in the album of a London bookseller his famous tribute to the memory of his friend, 'the proof and touchstone of all my cogitations.' 'I grieved then that I could not grieve. But since, I feel how great a part he was of me. His great and dear spirit haunts me.' A month later, while out walking, he fell down and cut his face; erysipelas ensued, and, on 29 December, he died. Mary survived him for thirteen years; she died in 1847, and was buried in the same grave with him in the churchyard at Edmonton. To the mind which estimates an author by his capacity for sustained masterpieces, the disconnected character of Lamb's writings offers some contrast to their reputation. A bundle of essays, a number of casual lyrics, one or two brief plays, a tale of striking pathos, a few narratives and adaptations of old authors for children and some critical notes on his favourite writersthese constitute the sum of his work. It was an age in which the journalist and essayist flourished, and the essays of Hazlitt contain more solid critical work, while those of De Quincey are more remarkable for their scholarship and for a highly-coloured eloquence the splendour of which faults of taste cannot dim. But, in play of fancy, in susceptibility to the varying shades of human emotion, in a humour which reflects clearly the perpetual irony of life, Lamb is without an equal. His essays, he wrote to John Taylor, 'want no Preface: they are all Preface. A Preface is nothing but a talk with the reader; and they do nothing else.' Through them shines the spirit of the man, alive to the absurdities of the world, tender to its sorrows, tolerant to its weaknesses. He courts the friendship, not the veneration, of his readers: he looks to them, not as disciples, but as fellow-men. By the candid revelation of himself in his essays and letters, by the light which they throw upon a union of heart and life between brother and sister unexampled in literature, he has won the affection of countless readers, even of those who have little care for the beauties of literary style. To all of these, the love and confidence which the Lambs inspired among their friends is still a living thing, and they can read with a sense of personal possession the touching words which Coleridge, at the end of a friendship of fifty years, inscribed in the margin of the poem written during a visit which they paid to Stowey, 'Charles and Mary Lamb, dear to me as my heart, yea as it were my heart.'CHAPTER IX

THE LANDORS, LEIGH HUNT, DE QUINCEY THE three writers who form the main subject of this chapter when regarded individually, may seem, at first sight, to have extremely little in common, except their date, the unusual length of time during which they were contemporaries and the closely connected fact that they survived all the greater men, and most of the smaller, of their own generation. But, when they come to be considered more narrowly and from the standpoint of strictly historical criticism, points of resemblance, or of that contrast which is often almost as much of a bond as resemblance for the purposes of such treatment, will rapidly emerge; and the advantage of treating them otherwise than as by three entirely disjoined articles in a dictionary will emerge likewise. Two of them were ambidextrous in respect of the harmonies of written speech-employing prose and verse with equal facility, though not, in both cases, in equal measure. De Quincey was a prose-writer only-at least, his verse is small in quantity and quite unimportant in quality; though he had the weakness to hint1 that, an he would, he could have versed it with the best of them. But he had another cross-connection with Landor (this time Leigh Hunt stood out), that both were elaborate and deliberate writers of the most ornate prose that English had known since the seventeenth century. Leigh Hunt and De Quincey-again to cross the ties-were both eminent examples of 'the man-of-lettersof-all-work,' who, arising in the late seventeenth, and earlier eighteenth, century, had been promoted quite out of Grub street early in the nineteenth. Landor's circumstances, ill as he managed them, precluded him from following this occupation of necessity; and this was fortunate, for, otherwise, the cook whose legendary body crushed the violet bed at Florence would have found more hapless fellows in the persons of many editors on the harder couches 1 Autobiography, chap. vii (vol. xiv, p. 197 in the 16 vol. edn of 1862).CH. Ix] Their Polygraphic Character 205 of Fleet street and Paternoster row. But, except in this ticklish point, he had all the ethos of the 'polygraph.' No special subject shows itself as exercising obsession, or receiving preference, in the vast exuberance of his Poems and Conversations and Miscellanies, except a strong tendency towards that criticism which is ever dominant, if not predominant, in the others. Even his classicism is a thing more of manner than of subject; and, though he shows it often in subject also, that is mainly because the one is germane to the other. Now, this polygraphic tendency is an essential characteristic of the new age. Yet, further, though we may here enter on more disputable matter, the three resemble each other in a characteristic difficult to formulate without making the field of dispute larger than it strictly should be. Although they all had talent-amounting, in Landor certainly, in De Quincey arguably, in Hunt scarcely, to genius-few critics accustomed to the taking of wide comparative views would put them in the first rank, absolutely, of their contemporaries. The mention of the names of Wordsworth, Coleridge, Scott, Byron, Shelley, Keats, at once, if it does not dwarf, lessens them, though, perhaps, some would deny this in the case of Landor. Even Southey, who, no doubt, in many, if not most, judgments is regarded as the dark star of the new pleiad, is, in popular language, 'a bigger man' than Leigh Hunt or De Quincey, though there may be individual things by De Quincey certainly, by Hunt perhaps, which Southey could not have done. Even Landor himself (who, be it remembered, though not much given to modesty, thought Southey at least his own equal) becomes artificial, academic, restricted to exquisite construction of sometimes rather lifeless form, beside his friend. Yet, if still keeping an eye on these general similarities and differences, we turn to more individual treatment, we shall find, if not primacy in them as wholes, such accomplishment in particulars and such distinction as, in some literatures, would make them actually supreme and, even in ours, assure them minor supremacies in detail. Biography, almost always unnecessary here, is, in this special place, almost wholly negligible; and this is fortunate because, while nothing really important happened to any of them, all three are surrounded with a sort of anti-halo of gossip which it would be most unprofitable to discuss. Whether Landor was wholly or only partly Boythorn; whether Hunt was wholly, partly or not at all Skimpole; whether the former's dignity was really dignified or a mixture of the grandiose and the childish; whether Hunt, again,206 The Landors, Leigh Hunt,DeQuincey [CH. was 'a noble fellow' or, at best, a good-natured Bohemian; whether De Quincey was an acute observer merely or a venomous carper on one side of his character, a deliberate mystifier or even falsifier of fact or a person with a marvellous gift for translating reality into romance on the other-these, and not a few more, are points upon which it is impossible for us to dilate. The reader whose curiosity is excited will find no difficulty, with the aid of the bibliography, in satisfying, and, perhaps, satiating, himself with accounts and discussions of the facts. He will also, one dare say, discover, later if not sooner, that the discussion, in almost every case, has very little to do with the literary appreciation of the exceedingly voluminous bodies of work added by them to English literature, which contain not a few instances of its finest work, which, in some cases, have exercised remarkable influence and which, though complete exploration of them is, in some cases, not easy, will never be explored by any affectionate and competent student of that literature without the discovery of treasures such as a student will revisit again and again. The lack of ease just glanced at requires, even with the assistance of the bibliography itself, a few remarks. It exists least in the case of Landor, though, even in his case, the fullest collectionForster's-is not quite complete and has not been for some time past very easy to obtain. It appears, however, to include all that is indispensable, though some additions recently made by Mr Stephen Wheeler are almost of importance, and amply provided with interest. With De Quincey, matters become, if not more recondite (for some of Landor's work seems almost inaccessible in the original editions), more complicated. To the completest edition of his collected works, by the late professor Masson, at least seven volumes of Miscellanea, printed since in different forms and shapes, have to be added; while his eccentric habit of leaving deposits of unpublished writing in his various abodes (sometimes merely lodgings) makes the discovery of yet more not very unlikely. But Leigh Hunt's is the worst case of all. No attempt even at a complete edition has ever been made; and it may be doubted whether the materials for one exist together in any library. If the whole were assembled it would probably make a collection of works as large, at least, as that of Voltaire. For Hunt, though, as has been said, a good deal of a Bohemian, had little or nothing of the idleness ascribed to the citizens of the spiritual Prague; and, if he had not the knack of managing or keeping money, wasix] Similarity of Landor's Prose and Verse 207 untiring in his efforts to earn it, though he does not seem, like De Quincey, to have written for the sake of writing, whether 'hunger and request of friends' pressed or not. But these inconveniences, though they exist, are not really so important as they may appear. In all three cases, the additions made from time to time to what may be called the working textus receptus have thrown very little new light on the general literary character of the authors; and that character, in two cases (Landor's and De Quincey's), is so clearly and deeply stamped, in the other (Leigh Hunt's) diffused in a manner so light but pervading and fully perceptible, that even the most bountiful 'windfall of the muses' possible now, though it might give additional pleasure, would hardly give new pleasure and would pretty certainly add nothing to our critical instruction. Let us, therefore, take them in order, directing the main survey on the individuals so as to prevent dispersion and confusion of view, but utilising whatever lights of community and comparison may present themselves. The two points which a careful student of Landor will soon discover for himself, are that singular ambidexterity in verse and prose already referred to, possessed by him in measure and manner utterly different from the fashion and degree in which it was possessed by Hunt, and, secondly, the equally unparalleled but much stranger fashion in which 'classic' and 'romantic' tendencies and characteristics were combined in him. Until these two points are independently reached by the student, or unless he consents to take them on trust till he has confirmed them by his own study, there is constant danger of misapprehension; and from that misapprehension some enthusiastic and otherwise valuable studies of him have not been free. The two propositions themselves require careful handling. Landor has been already contrasted with Hunt as to the special character of their joint addiction to prose and verse; but, in this particular respect, they are too far asunder for contrast to be anything but a contrast. Except a certain easy fluency which sometimes runs close to the undistinguished, if not to the distinctly slipshod, there is not much kinship between Hunt's style in prose and his style in verse. In some other poets who have also been great prose-writers there might even be said to have been a broad difference between their verse and their prose style, such as may be found in instances so different in themselves as Dryden and Matthew Arnold. Moreover, the styles and dictions of verse and prose have always, in English,2o8 The Landors, Leigh Hunt, DeQuincey [CH. been strongly contrasted; it is the case even in a writer like Wordsworth, who held theories adverse to such a contrast. But Landor's prose and Landor's verse are so strangely allied that there is practically nothing save the presence or absence of metre which distinguishes them, though, reversing the usual practice with his usual self-will, the prose diction and the prose imagery are sometimes more 'flowery and starry' than those of the verse. This is a real idiosyncrasy; and it can hardly be matched except in a language and literature which, oddly enough, Landor detested above all others-in French. And, even there-even in Voltaire and Victor Hugo, great as the likeness of their prose and their verse is in each of two cases which differ much from each other -the identity of the two manners is not so great as in Landor. He stands almost, but not quite, equally alone in his strange compound (for it is a real chemical compound, not a mere mechanical mixture) of classic and romantic. The names of Spenser, Milton, Gray, Matthew Arnold again and Swinburne, may rise to some lips by way of objection; but, in all cases, when they are examined, the elements will be found more separate than in Landor. He would himself probably have disliked-have, indeed, disclaimed, in his most Boythornian vein-any sympathy with romanticism. He boasted his indifference to Spenser himself; of his own contemporaries, he preferred Southey, who, in some ways, though not in all, was the least romantic of them. But it is what a man does, not what he says, that, in the higher courts of criticism, 'may be used against him.' That Landor's scholarship, except as regards his remarkable faculty of writing Latin verse, was not very deep or very wide, has long been known. Despite his fondness for Greek subjects, and the magical air of Hellenic quality which he has managed to throw over his treatment of them, it is admitted that, at one time, he was rather ignorant of Greek literature, and at no time thoroughly familiar with it, though he caught a good deal of it through Latin, with which he was thoroughly familiar, and of which some acute judges have found more real flavour in him than of Greek. But the important point for us at the moment is that, wold he nold he, this assumption of a classical garb, the selection of classical subjects, even this attempt to create and to diffuse a classical atmosphere, were all subtly conditioned by an underlying romantic influence which was of the age as well as of the man and which he could not resist. Except in a few of what may be justly called his epigrams, in the proper original sense, he never shows classical restraint in expression-even his avowed efforts toIX] Landor's Classicism 209 'unload' and 'cut out' frequently result in an obscure concentration and compression of 'beauties' rather than in classical conciseness and perspicuity combined. It is impossible to imagine anything more inconsistent with even the laxest classical conception of an epic than Gebir or any less Aristotelian drama than Count Julian. The only classical form which Imaginary Conversations, whether in verse or prose, suggest, is that ambiguous and, unfortunately, only in small part extant department the mime; while the elaborate and beautiful descriptions in prose recall only the very late and, to some extent, degenerate ecphrasesl of Greek rhetoricians and romancers. The famous lines of Swinburne, And through the trumpet of a child of Rome Rang the pure music of the flutes of Greece, are absolutely critical as regards the Romanising of the Hellenic in Landor; but exception might be taken, in no cavilling spirit, to the epithet 'pure.' The music was singularly blended-a mixed mode of Greek and Roman and modern-and though, perhaps, the musician's efforts were always or often consciously directed towards keeping down the modern element, he frequently failed, and sometimes, when he came nearest to success, succeeded only in artifice or variability. Still, as has been said, there is no one exactly like him or even very near to him in this blended character; and its results, at their happiest, were such as even English literature could not afford to lose. Although, to the general reader, Landor, if he is anything at all, is a writer of prose, his poetical work deserves to be considered first, for more reasons than that of the general priority of verse. This, though, in later days, he affected to regard it as an amusement only, was, to him, a life-long occupation; he only took to prose-he certainly only published it-in middle and later age, and it may be not ungenerously doubted whether despair of gaining the public ear with verse did not induce in him a certain 'turning to the Gentiles ' with prose. Although the bulk of his verse is almost necessarily less than that of his prose, it is very considerable; and may run, at a rough guess, to between forty and fifty thousand lines. The kinds of it are also sufficiently, if not extremely, various, ranging from the already mentioned epic and closet-drama through dialogues of a less and less theatrically dramatic kind, idylls with some conversation in them, and idylls purely narrative to an immense multitude-hundreds and almost thousands-of shorter 1 The &qpaoas, or set description, is one of the most characteristic features of late Greek work.

E. L. XII. CH. IX.

142 1 Tlze Landors, LeigA Hunt, De Quincey [cH. pieces; epigrams, sometimes in the modern, but nearly always in the Greek, sense, of all lengths and in a variety of metres, though Landor moulded his practice to his own mistaken theory of the comparative poverty of English in this respect and seldom tried, while he still more seldom succeeded in, anything which had not an iambic or trochaic base. The smallness of the audience which Gebir obtained at its first appearance was celebrated in a fashion humourous, but, as was his wont, rather over-laboured, by a contemporary and companion in the present chapter. De Quincey pretended to pride himself upon being 'a mono-Gebirist,' meaning, thereby, not (as stricter analogy would require) 'a reader of Gebir only' but 'the only reader of Gebirl.' This, of course, was an exaggeration; but it is certain that the poem was the very reverse of popular, though one very beautiful conceit-the fancy about the sea-shell remembering and repeating the music of the waves-found fairly early recognition and has long been familiar to thousands who never read another line of the poem. It contains, however, other passages as fine, or even, except sentimentally, finer, such as the magnificent distich: And the long moonbeam on the hard wet sand Lay, like a jasper column half up-reared. But this most classical of our poets has incurred the very curse which a successor in classicism pronounced a modernity. Gebir has numerous beautiful passages2, still more numerous beautiful lines and phrases. But it is strangely destitute of interest either of story or of character, and such action as it has is evolved neither with epic nor with dramatic skill. The versification and the diction both aim at a Miltonic stateliness and sometimes achieve it; but there are false notes in the phrase, if not in the verse, of which Milton never could have been guilty; and the verse itself has a monotony which it is one of Milton's greatest triumphs to have avoided. The most complimentary comparison that can be borrowed from the other arts for it is that of a bas-relief, worked with no small sculpturesque art, dignified in conception and execution, even heightened, here and there, with gold and colours, 1 He admitted that Southey had been another, but the only other, member of the sect. It was characteristic of Landor himself, for all his affected preference for few admirers, to be seriously nettled at De Quincey's joke. 2 The author, in his curious forfanterie, probably intended it to be supposed that there were many more in the 'loads [he] carted off to give it proportion.' Yet, to Southey, to whom he 'showed off' less frequently than to most, he admitted that he had ' boiled away too much.'IX]

Landor's Dramas

211

but producing, on the whole, an effect lifeless, bloodless and wanting in charm as well as, in parts, indistinct and confused. Landor called the very large body of verse of dramatic form which he published-a body filling nearly four hundred pages of between forty and fifty lines each-Acts and Scenes, expressly noting that 'none of them were offered to the stage, being no better than Imaginary Conversations in metre.' There is, however, a very marked difference between the first, the already mentioned Count Julian, and the rest of them. Count Julian is not easily distinguishable from the dramas-of the closet kind, but very frequently offered to the stage in Landor's time-which are noticed in other parts of this work, such dramas as those even of Coleridge and, still more, of Talfourd and Taylor, of Milman and Darley. Its acts are the regular five, its action is conducted in the usual stage manner and its style and diction conform to the somewhat artificial stateliness which, though discarding the worst eighteenth century 'stage lingo,' remained, and, to some extent, still remains, the orthodox speech of tragedy. It is somewhat less artificial in style than Gebir; and the enforced, though minimised, action of a drama frees it, to a certain extent, from the deadly-liveliness of the epic. But, on the whole, it reminds one, as plays of its class often do, of Sainte-Beuve's polite but fatal verdict on Don Garcie de Navarre, Molibre's one effort in alien kind. It is an essai pdle et noble; but little, if anything, more. Being Landor's, it could not but contain some passages of fine blank verse. But here, with, perhaps, one exception, it is far below Gebir; while even the advantages of drama do not suffice to give it real liveliness of action. The points of the situations are not taken; the characters are not worked out and, by the strangest mistake of all, 'the tragic frailties,' the great secret in which Aristotle's principles and Shakespeare's practice agree, Covilla's1 disgrace and Julian's treason are, as it were, 'previous questions '-over and done before the play begins. The fact simply is that the modern and romantic touch in Landor made him unequal either to formal epic or to formal drama. He wanted the loose movement, the more 'accidented' 1 Landor's name for Roderick's victim, usually called Florinda. It should be noticed as a caution most necessary for readers that the chronological order of Landor's Poems is very different from that of their places in Forster's edition. The Neapolitan trilogy, for instance, now to be noticed, was written twenty-four years after Count Julian. But Landor's competence in writing, if not in conduct, lasted unusually late; and the maintenance of his literary powers is one of his numerous extraordinary points. 14-2212 The Landors, Leigh Hunt, De Quincey [CH. situations, the full, and sometimes almost irrelevant, talk, the subsidiary interest of description and other things of the kind, to enable him to be something more than 'pale and noble.' In the great bulk of Acts and Scenes, and especially in the long and important one which comes next (in his Works, though not in time) to Count Julian, Andrea of Hungary, as well as, though to a slightly less degree, in its sequels, which complete the trilogy on Giovanna of Naples, he has provided himself liberally with all these things. The three pieces, which together extend to a hundred and forty of the large pages above referred to, are much more than 'imaginary conversations in metre'; they form, in fact, a historical novel, thrown into conversational dramatic form with all the redundances of the novel as they may seem from the dramatic point of view. Sometimes, the treatment approaches more nearly to the fashion of an actable play scene; sometimes, to that of a chapter of Scott or Dumas turned into verse and put in action instead of narration. And this hybrid character is maintained, almost continuously, in the pieces that follow: more than a dozen in number, though always shorter, and sometimes much shorter, than the Neapolitan set. The merits and defects of the form, and its instances, as well as a still more interesting subject, the relative merit of the prose and verse, will be better discussed when we come to the prose itself. It may be enough to say here that, in this new handling, Landor at last discovers the source of that interest which he had failed to attain in Gebir and Count Julian. It may be matter for question whether this interest is equally maintained in his more numerous but, both as individuals and in the mass, less bulky Hellenics, of which there are some fifty, spread, in point of composition, over a large part of his life. They were above called idylls, and, according to Greek practice, they strictly deserve the name. As such, they are entitled to use or disuse the dramatic or, at least, the dialogic form at pleasure; and they avail themselves of the privilege. Thus, one of the best known, Coresus and Callirrhoe, is a continuous narrative; another, Menelaus and Helen, has both dialogue and action. There is no doubt, however, that, except to very peculiar, aInd, perhaps, rather factitious, taste, there is something wanting in these longer poetical works by Landor. They excite esteem very commonly, except when he tries humour or argument; satisfaction and admiration, sometimes; transport, hardly ever save by occasional flashes, mostly of mere description. It was, perhaps, much forIX]

Landor's Shorter Poems

213

Landor to condescend to the admission that his 'Cenci' scenes do not challenge comparison with Shelley's 'noble tragedy'; but the comparison forces itself all the more unfortunately, while the preface in which it occurs closes with a piece of that miss-fire irony of which Landor was unluckily prodigal. In reading Acts and Scenes and Hellenics, one finds, and in re-reading them one expects, hardly any 'jewels five words long.' A few pieces of the beautiful elaborate, but too often lifeless, description which finds a better home in the prose occur; but nothing (if it be not rash to judge so positively of so wide a field) equal to the best things in Gebir. The situations are often-in fact, usually-well selected; the composition, both in the lower and the higher senses of that word in different arts, is frequently admirable, the execution correct and creditable; but the total effect is too often cold1. It is not that Landor is by any means a stickler for what is commonly called propriety. His situations are not seldom of the luscious kind, and, though never guilty of coarseness, he is occasionally chargeable with innuendo. But, in aiming at passion, he too often only attains sentiment. The feeling may be there; in some cases, it certainly is; but it is too often birth-strangled in the expression, partly by an attempt at classical restraint, which, as pointed out above, is not really natural to the writer, and partly by the singular verbosity also glanced at, which, in a way, is the 'escapement' and compensation for this restraint. There are comparatively few of Landor's longer pieces in which he does not, as it were, hold overflow meetings-which he addresses partly with repetitions and partly with ekings of what he has said before2. The advantage, to such a poet, of shorter and, in some cases, definitely limited forms can hardly be over-estimated; and it is enhanced not merely by that blend of classic and romantic which has been noticed, but by a further blend-to some extent consequential-of eighteenth and nineteenth century touch which is more noticeable in Landor than in almost any of his companions. They, for the most part-even Wordsworth, even Scott-grew out of one strain into the other; Landor kept the mixture. He is 1 The very best of the exceptions is, perhaps, the beautiful and almost wellknown Hamadryad, which is faultless throughout and contains one of Landor's very finest single lines, And the axe shone behind him in their eyes, where picture, sound and hidden, as well as obvious, meaning are marvellously combined. 2 In fact, to use his own words against him (see above p. 210, note2), if, in Gebir, he had 'boiled away too much,' he certainly, in some of these pieces, 'boiled away too little,'214 The Landors, Leigh Hunt, DeQuincey [CH.

thus able, in his best so-called epigrams and elsewhere, to observe the neatness and clear outline of eighteenth century occasional pieces, while suffusing it with the later colour and diffusing over it the later atmosphere. A little piece, which comes quite early in the collection of 1846 and which was probably written nearly half a century earlier, for it is one of the lanthe poems, Pleasure, why thus desert the heart, exhibits this combination remarkably; while it has much to do with the extraordinary charm of the two little masterpieces Rose Aylmer and Dirce. But, through all these mote-like poems and poemlets, the total number of which comes not so very far short of a thousand, though there may be triviality, false wit, dulness and other faults here and there, there is always the chance of coming across that flash and glow of the opal which Landor has in a special manner and measure, which is the dearest of delights to true lovers of poetry and over which he retained command, in these short pieces, almost to his death. Some, even of these pieces, such as Gunlaug (an early attempt) and Guidone and Lucia, may almost be called long, running to five hundred lines or so; and there are numerous pages which only just, or do not quite, suffice for a poem. But the scale runs down to single couplets, even single lines, and a greater number of the constituents does not exceed from half a score to a score of lines. Here, the drawbacks of Landor's larger pieces, to a great extent, disappear. A considerable number of these smaller pieces are, of course, trivial; but their smallness makes the triviality at once apparent, and they can be passed over without the disappointed and disappointing labour which the conscientious reader of a longer piece undergoes. The miniature jewels above referred to, the larger but almost throughout admirable odes to Wordsworth and Southey, a positive majority of the Ianthe pieces (which would deserve isolation in a separate but complete sheaf, for they have a distinctive quality rare in the vast harvest of love poetry), the Browning sonnet, still, perhaps, the best thing on its subject and in its kind after seventy years, are all consummate; and there are many to add. To the last, in Dry Sticks, he retained that strange occasional command of perfect phrase which was his special merit and privilege, and of which almost his greatest single example is the famous Beyond the arrows, views and shouts of men in Count Julian. Seldom or never on pages facing each other in the published workIX]

Imaginary Conversations

215

of a man between eighty and ninety can one find two such opposed pieces as the admirable monostich of A Sensible Girls Reply, to Moore's " Our couch shall be roses all spangled with dew" It would give me rheumatics: and so it would you (the best joke as well as one of the last that he ever made), and the contrast: Ah Southey, how we stumble on through life Among the broken images of dreams Not one of them to be raised up again. Yet it must have been later still, so far as the time of composition went, that he wrote Rose the Third and other beautiful things. In fact, selections from Landor have not, perhaps, even yet done full justice to his poetry; though there is hardly any poet who requires selection so much. It is, however, undoubtedly, as a writer of prose that Landor is most generally known, so far as he can be said to be generally known at all; and it was in prose that the most copious and individual products of his genius were supplied even to his most critical admirers. Imaginary Conversations did not begin to be published1 till he was past the middle of his unusually long life; but he was untiring in the production of them to the very last, and their bulk is very considerable indeed, especially if we include Pericles and A spasia and The Pentameron of right and The Citation and Examination of Shakespeare of grace. Their subjects are of the most varied nature possible-ranging from Greek to actually contemporary matters, and Landor, at least, endeavours to make the treatments as various. It has been pointed out already that his verse Acts and Scenes have much of the character of verse-novels, and, in Imaginary Conversations, which include a good deal of action as well as conversation, the absence of the restraints of verse is accompanied naturally enough by a still wider expatiation in both speech and incident. The result very often, if not always, gives the same restoration of interest which has been already noticed. Tragedy and comedy, history and imagination, scenery and sentiment, all are made to come in, and, to enhance the attraction, Landor endeavours, after a fashion which, indeed, had been essayed by others, especially by De Quincey in Confessions of an English Opium Eater, to throw over large parts of his work 1 He had tried something of the kind once or twice earlier; but the ' crystallising touch' seems to have been given by a casual observation in one of Southey's letters as to his own Colloquies.216 The Landors, Leigh Hunt, De Quincey [CH. a charm of elaborate prose style emulating the most ambitious efforts of the poet. In poetry itself, he had been almost rigidly eighteenth century in form if not quite in diction. He had actually deprecated, in his correspondence with Southey, the adoption of any but familiar and consecrated metrical forms, not merely as regarded exotic and archaic devices, classical metres, and so forth, but even as concerned new stanza-combinations of already recognised line-forms. But, in prose, he summoned to his aid every device of rhythm, colour, word-value, sound-concert and other helps that rhetoric and prosody itself, used in the most general way, could give him. There was no longer, as in his verse, any effort to 'boil away,' to 'cart off loads' of matter likely to be attractive to the general: there was, on the other hand, evident effort to 'let everything go in,' to 'load every rift with ore.' The effect, from the point of view last suggested especially, was a triumphant success, except in the eyes of those who, reversing Landor's position, held, as to prose, the same views which he held as to verse, and disliked lavish and gorgeous ornament in it. More beautiful things-from the famous 'dreams' which sometimes fill pages, to the little phrases, clauses and passages which occur constantly-are not to be found in literature, ancient or modern, English or foreign. Some have gone so far as to insist that there are none so beautiful; a position which a critic whose memory is fairly full and his judgment fairly catholic will be slow to accept, and which is itself, perhaps, essentially uncritical. In their own way, they are perfect, and that is enough. When, however, we leave this charming quality of style, it is not so easy to keep to the path of simple eulogy. There are few more curious instances of difference of opinion in the history of literary criticism, though it shows many such, than the varying estimates of Landor's humour. There are those, sometimes men of renown, who find it 'exquisite'; there are others, not perhaps by any means very limited in their appreciation of this elusive but important quality, who are seldom, if ever, able to enjoy it at allwho think it, from The Citation and Examination of Shakespeare down to the conversation entitled The Duke de Richelieu, Sir Firebrace Cotes, Lady G. and Mr Normanby, the most depressing exhibition that ever a man of genius made of himself, to whom it seems forced, trivial, at best schoolboyish, at worst almost, if not quite, vulgar. Appreciation of his sentiment does not, perhaps, swing the pendulum through so enormous an arc, but it occupies a sufficiently wide one in its variety, as may be seen from the fact that what someIx] Landor's Criticism 217 of his greatest admirers call 'girlish,' others, no less enthusiastic on the whole, style 'missish,' a difference slight in word, formidable in sense. Few, even of these partisans, have ranked his reasoning powers high, and still fewer, even of those who, in a way, sympathise with him politically, have shown much eagerness to accept him as a mouthpiece of their own political views. He seems-and this is one of the legacies of the century of his birth, to have spoken of religious and ecclesiastical matters without the slightest real conception of what these matters mean; and, in his miscellaneous utterances, especially on contemporary subjects, there is a perpetual atmosphere of 'fling,' through which the missiles dart and hurtle as if from a dozen different quarters at once, with a result which recalls all attributes of chaos-noise, darkness, confusion. The escapes from this-in themselves not always quite continuous-provided by Pericles and Aspasia, by the Boccaccio and Petrarca pieces, Euthymedes and, fortunately, not a few others, may, perhaps, acquire an additional character of paradises from their association with this Tartarus or Limbo; but the critical historical estimate can hardly neglect the latter. There is probably no part of Landor's work, not even the long poems, which has been less read than his chiefly critical miscellanies in prose; and, though the general reader, perhaps, is not to be blamed for his neglect, the student will not pass them by except to his great loss. It is true that nowhere does that uncritical quality which accompanies Landor when he is most critical more distinctly appear, whether it be in more general matters, such as his spelling reform crotchet, or in direct comment on individual books and authors. But, just as in Poems and Conversations you are never without hope and seldom without satisfaction of beauty, so, here, you need never despair of luminous flashes of critical utterance. In short, you are driven to say that while there is hardly in the whole of literature an author so difficult to read through without constant dissatisfaction, so there is none whom it is so necessary to read through in order to judge him fairly and enjoy him intelligently. The result of such a reading to those who look first to form and expression can hardly but be satisfactory; to those who look no further, if there be any such, few writers can be Landor's rivals. But there is still another split of opinion between his actual admirers as to the positive value of his matter. Some have gone so far-while, of course, admitting the extreme unwisdom of Landor's conduct-as to allow his literary work, when not218 The Landors, Leigh Hunt, De Quincey [CH. expressive of mere irritation, crotchet, or prejudice, the supreme merit of 'wisdom' itself. Some have called him a great thinker, though a feeble reasoner in support of his thoughts; and he has actually been credited with having uttered 'more delicate aphorisms of human nature than anyone except Shakespeare.' It is true that there may have been latent guile in the adjective 'delicate,' covertly, though not openly, narrowing the compliment. Yet, there is no doubt that high intellectual and moral value is attributed to Landor by some. Others, prepared to go almost the furthest lengths possible in admiration of his expression at its best, find it impossible to rank him very high in these other respects. They do not share the vulgar objection to the commonplace and obvious; they know that the greatest things in prose and poetry alike are commonplaces on which the writer has thrown (to use Coleridge's consummate image) the special moonlight or sunlight of his own thought and treatment, thus differentiating and subliming them. But this is what they rarely, if ever, find in Landor. There is exquisite expression, but it is seldom more than the expression, exquisite indeed, but without halo or aura, of what may almost be called copy-book truths or drawing-book pictures. He has scores of true, tender, touching, charming things on death and love and youth and age on the one side, and, in his sober moments, not a little commonsense on the other. He has almost always at hand, if not actually present, perfection of expression. But, for acuteness of practical intellect dividing joint and marrow, and shattering fallacy, you will never find in him anything like Johnson's 'You do not know, Sir, that he is guilty till the judge has decided'; nor, for the disclosure of poetic altitudes and abysses, will you find anything like We are such stuff As dreams are made on, and our little life Is rounded with a sleep, or Our noisy years seem moments in the being Of the eternal Silence. Indeed, though Landor lived to receive the homage of Swinburne, his schoolboy walks had taken him past the house where still lingered the daughter of Addison; and, outrageous though the statement may seem, there is still much in him which reminds one more of Pope than of Shakespeare or Wordsworth. It would be negligent in such a place as the present to take no notice of some, at least, of the opinions which have existed in reference to this remarkable writer. His own more thanIx] History of Landor's Reputation

219

sufficiently quoted remark (which is, perhaps, not subject to the charge of mixed metaphor sometimes brought against it)' has not been quite so exactly fulfilled as is also commonly said; for, in his sense, he 'dined' very early, and the guests, though certainly few, were as certainly select. From Southey's eulogies2, which were, however, often accompanied by judicious warnings, some deductions must, no doubt, be made. They had entered too early into a quite uncorrupt and very interesting but rather disabling mutual admiration society of practically unlimited liability; and, with some strong differences, there was too great a sympathy between them for perfectly achromatic judgment. 'You and I,' said a very distinguished man of letters of a later generation to one not quite so eminent, 'ought not to review each other.' But Southey was by no means Landor's only admirer, nor were Southey and De Quincey alone in the condemnation above referred to; Coleridge, Wordsworth, Byron, Lamb, Shelley, Leigh Hunt, with whatever minor differences, joined in the admiration, and the only first-rate dissident, whose dissent was chequered by not a little eulogy, was the certainly unsurpassed but wayward and somewhat incalculable spirit of Hazlitt. In the middle generation of the nineteenth century 'all the wits were there,' in the same sense, from Tennyson and Browning, Carlyle and Dickens downwards. Later still, the unmeasured laudation of Swinburne and the less exuberant and unqualified but almost as high estimate of Sir Sidney Colvin followed; and there is no sign of much alteration in the youngest opinion. 'For the vulgus never: for the clerus surely' has been the almost hackneyed but well-justified summary. In such cases, there is always a temptation either to join the chorus or to take the equally easy but even less commendable line of more or less paradoxical disparagement. In the foregoing estimate, a strenuous endeavour, based on long acquaintance and frequently revised impression, has been made to keep the difficult and dangerous middle way of strict criticism. The quality in Landor which repels, or, at least, fails to attract, some readers, except from the side of pure form, was well, if almost accidentally, pointed out by a critic hardly professional, at least as regards English literature, but exceptionally scholarly, and 1 ' I shall dine late but the room will be well lighted and the guests few but select.' 2 It is rather unfortunate that the complete correspondence between the two has never been published. Forster supplied not a few of the lacunae in Cuthbert Southey's and J. W. Warter's collections but left much out or gave it only in summary; and, even had he been more liberal, the disjecta membra of the three storehouses would have been hard to put together.220 7ze Landors, Leigh Hunt, De Quincey [CH. not in the least given to carping-the late Lewis Campbell, who complained of his 'aloofness and unreality.' It is only in the apices of his poetry, such as Rose Aylmer and in a few passages of his prose, such as the purple passages of the 'dreams,' the scholar episode of The Citation and Examination of Shakespeare and a few others, where these peculiarities are overcome by genuine passion1 or, in one way or another, positively suit the subject, that Landor escapes a certain artificiality. Another very happy phrase of Campbell, applied to Landor's friend Dickens2, emphatically does not apply, except on these rarest occasions, to Landor himself. His characters are never exactly 'human effluences,' they are effluences of books and of a fantastic individual combination of scholarly taste and wilful temperament. His aloofness is not the poetic aloofness which Matthew Arnold adumbrates in the famous passage of Resignation-a critical but, at the same time, sympathetic contemplativeness-for, except in relation to literature, and even largely as to that, he is nothing if not uncritical; while even his sympathies, which are often keen, are so twisted and tossed by whims and crazes and crotchets of all kinds that they are never to be depended on. That his humour is even more uncertain has been said already. When any lover of style and form remembers not merely his great show pieces but the smaller patches-the ' stripes of purple,' as Quintilian would say, woven into all the prose, and not sparingly scattered over the verse-he is apt to pronounce Landor one of the mightiest of magicians; and so, at these times, he is. But he is a Prospero with a most imperfect and intermittent command over his Ariel, and, perhaps, always better suited to uttermost isles of fancy than to the Milans of the actual world. But, if Landor only occasionally escaped the charge of being an insufficient Prospero, the title 'Ariel of criticism,' which has actually been applied to Leigh Hunt, is far more unfortunate. This excess of honour seems to have been suggested by a certain lightness (which he undoubtedly possessed, but which is an ambiguous term) and by his unquestionable habit of flitting from subject to subject. But Hunt, in more ways than one, was by no means a 'delicate' spirit, if he was a spirit at all, and he was frequently trivial, which Ariel never was. He had, however, gifts much above those of the average man-of-letters-of-all-work to 1 There is such, undoubtedly, in Essex and Spenser. 2 'Dickens's shreds and patches, if not human beings are human effluencesdtrbppotat' (Memorials of Lewis Campbell, p. 396).IX]

Leigh Hunt as an Influence

221

whose class he undoubtedly belongs; he managed to do some things, both in verse and in prose, which have a curious attraction in their own way; he was a great benefactor by opening walks of delight in the lower but quite respectable paradises of miscellaneous literature; and, as an origin, or at least a maker of fresh starts, in more than one literary department and fashion, he has historical interest, superior to that possessed by some greater executants, and never, perhaps, yet quite fairly allowed him. To no single man is the praise of having transformed the eighteenth century magazine, or collection of light miscellaneous essays, into its subsequent form due so much as to Hunt. Allowing for the undeniable truth that if a certain thing has to be done, evolutionary fate always finds some one to do it, it may still be said that, without Hunt, Sketches by Boz would have been a kind of Melchisedec, and Household Words improbable. His very enemies in Blackwood owed him royalty a hundred years ago, and it is doubtful whether even the most infallible and self-reliant youth of the twentieth century, when it writes articles of the 'middle' style, and even, sometimes, of the purely critical, is not similarly, though less directly, indebted to Hunt. His influence on pure criticism and on poetry was not very great, but in neither was it negligible. In verse, he had, beyond doubt, the credit of being the first deliberately to desert the stopped decasyllabic couplet which had reigned over the whole eighteenth century and the latter part of the seventeenth, revising the overrun of the Jacobeans and first Carolines. Keats may not have learnt the change from Hunt only, but from the originals as well; yet this does not lessen Hunt's importance. Hunt himself may have been open to censure in his enjoyment of the revival, but that is another question. In criticism, he has the merit, which Macaulay long ago assigned to him, of a most unusual and, at the time, almost unique catholicity, which was not alloyed (as, to some extent, perhaps, it was in Lamb) by the presence of mere caprice, and (as it still more certainly was in that admirable critic) by a sort of complementary exclusiveness. Hunt could not only like both Spenser and Dryden, both Addison and the great early seventeenth century dramatists, he could also expatiate into those foreign literatures which, at the time (putting aside the new fashion for German), were much less known than they had been. Except Dante, who, for the most part, flew over his head, and who, when he came nearer, brushed, as by wings, Hunt's prejudices in positive religion heavily, it is difficult to name any great, or even good,222 T he Landors, Leih Hunt, De Quincey [CH. writer whom he did not, so far as he could, appreciate, and his famous recognition of the greatness of the Beatrice-Joanna and De Flores part of Middleton's Changeling, is only the best known of numerous good hits, where others, even Lamb, had missed. Even the prejudices just mentioned did not mislead him to the same extent as that to which they misled others of his contemporaries on both sides, and, here again, he may be said to have been almost more important as an influence than as a practitioner. But his actual practice in all three directions-as poet, as critic and as 'miscellanist'-has merit, and, in the latter two cases, volume, which demand less general and more particular examination. Hunt's poetical production, considering the length of his life and the fluency of his pen, was not very extensive. When, some dozen years before his death, he was asked or permitted by Moxon to issue his Poetical Works in a small pocket volume, he got together rather less than three hundred pages, but closely printed and containing, perhaps, nine or ten thousand lines. It does not, indeed, include one of his very best things-the fine sonnet with at least one magnificent line, The laughing queen that caught the world's great hands, which he wrote in competition with Keats and Shelley and by which he beat both these, his otherwise immeasurable betters. But everything else by which he is best known and to be known is here, The Story of Rimini, re-written but by no means improved; Abou ben Adhem, which, in the milder form of 'high seriousness,' has few superiors of its scale, and the delightful rondeau, Jenny kissed me, of which the same may be said in respect of graceful mixture of sentiment and jest; the unequal but, in part, excellent Man, Fish and Spirit, and, perhaps, a few more. It must, however, be a somewhat exceptional taste or, rather, appetite which would desiderate a larger body of Leigh Hunt's verse. The few things highly praised above are very few, and, taken with their company, they have a singular air of being out of itof having come there by some caprice of the muses. Rimini has the historical value already assigned to it and more; for, besides its versification, it gives other 'patterning' to easy verse-narrative. But the tone of it-if not, as was pretended at the time, immoralis mawkishly sentimental, the language trivial and slipshod and the whole style what Persius meant by delumbe and in labris natans. The choice of subject, after Dante, could hardly have been more unfortunate, and Hunt showed the same insensibility to an almost equal danger in choosing that of Hero and Leander.Ix] Leigh Hunt's Merits and Defects 223 The Palfrey is a pleasant enough variation, in the lighter octosyllable revived by Coleridge and Scott, of the old fabliau, and it is, perhaps, unfair to The Glove that its triviality should have provoked, and have been exposed by, Browning's opposition piece. But this same triviality is everywhere in Hunt; and, in The Feast of the Poets and that of the Violets [poetesses], it unfortunately comes very near to vulgarity. It is, however, lifted out of this by the serious purpose of Captain Sword and Captain Pen. Some, especially those who share its anti-militarist spirit, have held this to be the best thing for combined quantity and quality that Hunt did in verse. Others differ; not merely antipathetically. But actual triviality-not mere lightness of subject and treatment as in the pseudo-Anacreon; and in some of the medieval poets, especially Latin; or, again, in Johannes Secundus and Herrick and Prior and Moore and many later poets but-triviality in the proper sense, the triviality of the rags and straws that flit about the common objects of literature, is fatal to poetry; and there is, let it be repeated for the last time, far too much of this in Hunt's verse. It is not absent from his prose; but it is much less essentially fatal there, and, though he has in prose, perhaps, nothing quite so good as the few best things of his verse, he has an immensely larger proportion comparatively, and a very considerable bulk positively, of good and pleasant matter. The abovementioned merit of teaching the miscellaneous essay to cast the once bright and graceful, but now wrinkled, faded and shabby, skin of The Spectator form can hardly be exaggerated. He was not so fortunate or so wise in adopting, in common with most of his contemporaries, the abuse of the editorial 'we'-a thing not, indeed, unsuitable to formal, and rather solemn, discussion, but frequently irritating, if not absurd, in light discursive writing. Of this same light discursive writing, however, Hunt was really a master and even-in virtue of his precursorship especially, but not solely-a great master. Nothing is easier than to show that Coleridge, Hazlitt, Lamb, Landor, De Quincey and others, had qualities which Hunt had not; but it may be questioned whether any one of them had quite his faculty-the faculty of the born journalist and book maker-of tackling almost any subject that presented itself in a fairly adequate, and not seldom quite attractive, fashion. He showed it in dozens (literally) of papers and books, from The Reflector to The Old Court Suburb, the list of his achievements including some remarkable tours deforce such as that New Tatler which he wrote single-handed for some eighteen months. It is,224 TheLandors, Leigh Hunt, De Quincey [CH. again, easy to say that of this facile, gossipy, superficial way of writing we have had enough and too much; that it underlies Ben Jonson's sentence on its first examples three hundred years ago as being a 'flashy thing'; that the two hundred years which saw comparatively little of it were happier than the succeeding hundred which has seen a great deal. Yet it is certain that, as Hunt restarted and refashioned the style, it has done very little harm. It has, perhaps, done some good; and, beyond all question, it has brought about a good deal of not disgraceful pleasure. The man whose name can be put in such a sentence deserves that the sentence should be recorded in history. The singular mixture of merits and defects which has made it necessary to tread the critical middle way with special care in the case of the two preceding writers extends, also, to the third. With De Quincey, indeed, we return to a higher general level than that to which we have had to descend in order to consider Leigh Hunt. Yet, though even Hunt's poetical altitudes are not of the highest or loneliest, the things which have been referred to make him a poet, if not a great poet, for moments; while De Quincey not only never accomplished poetry but, as was noticed in the earlier part of this chapter, indulged in something perilously like blasphemy of it. For, to say that you might have been such a poet as your neighbours when those neighbours are such as were De Quincey's, and that you did not choose to be, comes perilously near the unforgivable. But his prose soars into regions which Hunt could never have reached so far as form goes; while its matter, with inequalities, again perilous, in some respects, keeps an altogether higher level of intellect, scholarship, taste and so forth, than Hunt's pleasant chatter could attain. But De Quincey's literary history, so far as public acknowledgment goes, has been curious and contrasts rather remarkably with that of his two fellows here. Beginning distinctly late, Confessions of an English Opium Eater gave him, with all good judges, a very high position which he never wholly lost. But he did not follow it up with any substantive work; for some time, he wrote hardly anything, and scattered what he produced in miscellaneous and, most often, anonymous publications; and, till very near the close of his long life, he held a curious and rather anomalous position as a sort of amateur or freelance hovering on the outskirts of literature and 'picqueering,' as they would have said in Dryden's time, on the subject in brilliant but desultory raids. Not till near the close did he attempt 'collection.'IX]

De Quincey's Popularity

225

There are probably not many experienced judges of the ways of the public in regard to literature who would not have been somewhat doubtful as to the success of collection and publication, in an unusually large number of volumes, of articles, scarcely ever connected in subject, dealing, not unfrequently, with matters not obviously popular, spread in composition over a period in which public taste had altered not a little, and pervaded by all sorts of tricks and mannerisms of style and thought. But the 'fifties,' after a period in which criticism had not commanded much favour and in which it had not, perhaps, deserved much, were recovering their appetite for it; and De Quincey, whatever subject he touched, was nothing if not critical, though, as a literary critic of individuals, he was very untrustworthy. Moreover, the frequent presence in his writing of the most elaborately ornamental passages appealed to tastes which he had himself been one of the first to excite, and which had been steadily growing. The scheme-first of a selection in four volumes, then of a collection in twenty-was not interrupted by his death; and settled down, an almost unique occurrence in English literature, into other collections of sixteen and fourteen, which were again and again reprinted. It has been said, probably without exaggeration, that there was no writer more popular than De Quincey with clever boys of upper school and lower college age, from about 1855 for twenty or five-and-twenty years onward. For the succeeding period of about the same length there has been, perhaps, something of a reaction, or, at any rate, something of desuetude. W. E. Henley was fond of attacking our author as 'Thomas De Sawdust,' not a very brilliant nickname, though too much in De Quincey's own worst style. The humour of such things as the once famous On Murder has gone out of fashion. But, De Quincey has never lost a high reputation, though there have been some dissidences among estimates of him as a writer of ornate prose; and there are those who, admitting serious faults in him, decline to rest his merits merely on his prose of this kind, while joining in the fullest admiration of its qualities. These merits are undeniable, save by those who object to ornate prose altogether; but the consideration of them has been sometimes unluckily disturbed by unnecessary and invidious comparison. Although there is no form of criticism which the present writer dislikes so much or of which he has so low an opinion as that which endeavours to class writers in order of merit, it would perhaps be affectation, and would almost certainly be unsatisfactory E. L XII. CH. IX. 15226 TheLandors, Leigh Hunt, De Quincey [CH. to the reader, if no notice were taken here of the attempts, sometimes made by persons of distinction, to pit Landor against De Quincey, and award the first and second class to one or the other as the case may be. According to the system here preferred they are both in the first class of this special subject. If it is probable -it may not be quite certain-that De Quincey could not have written the finest passages of the Dream of Boccaccio, it is a mere fact that Landor never wrote anything like the best passages of Our Ladies of Sorrow. His imagination was too precise; it had not the 'hues of sunset and eclipse' which De Quincey could command. On the other hand, there is what may be called a dewiness, a freshness of talk about natural objects in him which De Quincey has never reached; and he was incapable (at least when he was not trying to be humourous) of the false notes and glaring contrasts of colour in which De Quincey sometimes indulged. They are, in short, stars differing, not in amount, but in kind or constitution of glory. The details of this difference in rhythm, in diction and in various other rhetorical particulars are too minute and would require too much technical expatiation to be dealt with fully here. But it may be generally said, in supplement to the comparisons as little odious as possible put above, that De Quincey's music is more complicated and sometimes more definitely of the bravura kind than Landor's, that his diction (though Landor does not by any means disdain foreign and specially technical-botanic terms) is more composite; and that, in accordance with the stronger purely romantic strain in him (though he was, perhaps, except in the point of Latin versemaking, a better scholar than Landor), he seems more often to aim at the vague suggestion, Landor at the precise expression of thought and image. Although, however, it would be most absurd to deny that this mastery of ornate prose is De Quincey's chief claim to a high position in our literature, it would be almost equally unjust to admit it as the only one or even as the only one of importance. The defects which chequer even this merit to some extent, and the others to a much greater, will be faithfully dealt with; the merits themselves demand the more distinct insistence, because, as has been said, there has, of late, been something of a tendency to neglect, if not to deny, them. They were, indeed, extraordinary qualifications for what has been called 'polygraphy.' De Quincey's reading was very wide, and, though it was sometimes desultory, it was by no means always so. His interests, though in life he was apt to seem an abstracted and unpractical creature, rangedIX] De Quincey's Merit in Substance 227 far beyond books. Metaphysics and political economy, verbal criticism of the most minute kind and public events of all sorts, from the Williams murders to the Crimean war and the Indian mutiny; history ancient and modern, with all its 'fringes' of manners, and so forth; contemporary biography; criticism of the more general and abstract kind; all these and many more formed the farrago of De Quincey's books and articles. Despite his excessive, and often unlucky, activity in his own and other people's business, some who knew Landor best, and admired him most, have doubted whether he was not always more or less absorbed by his own fancies, his very activities being disastrously excited and affected by the breaking off of his dreams. De Quincey, who passed through life like a kind of shadow, was constantly occupied with most unshadowlike surroundings, though no one would dream better where he-or his opium-chose. Extreme variety of subject is, therefore, even if we confine the word subject to its lowest meaning, at least as characteristic of De Quincey's works as of Hunt's and Landor's prose; in other ways, it is greater. His application of intellectual strength to most things that he touches differentiates him from the triviality of Hunt and the temperamental uniformity of Landor; the scale of his essays is far more ambitious than that of Hunt, and he escapes what, after a time, becomes the rather artificial, if not positively monotonous, form of the conversation. To this must be added the strange alternations of his handling from the most intricate and (some would say) wiredrawn logicalities to the loftiest flights of rhetoric; the curious glancing habit of mind which indulges itself in endless divagation, again less trivial than Hunt's, but almost as active; the stores of out of the way knowledge; the quaint attitudes of thought and fancy. Those who, in the days of rather idle theorising on aesthetics, insisted on the pleasures of 'unexpectedness,' ought to have found them in De Quincey to an unparalleled extent, while the unexpected things include not seldom the nuggets or, rather, pockets of golden style referred to, and others of thought original and forcibly put. His counterbalancing faults are, indeed, not small. The greatest of them all must, indeed, force itself upon almost any reader who has been gifted with, or has acquired, any critical faculty. It is what has been called, in words not easy to better, 'an unconquerable tendency to rigmarole.' It has been admitted that De Quincey's unexpectedness and divagation are often sources of pleasure; but it cannot be denied that they are often, also, sources 15-2228 The Landors, Legh Hunt,De Quincey [cH. of irritation-sometimes of positive boredom. He does not even wait for fresh game to cross the track of his original and proper quarry: he is constantly and deliberately going out of his way to seek and start it right and left. Too often, also, this divagation takes the form of a jocularity which appears to irritate some persons almost always, and which, perhaps, few, when they have attained to years of discretion, can invariably enjoy. His taste is by no means infallible; he has some curious prejudices; and, though the protest against his treatment of personalities is not, perhaps, wholly justified, there is, certainly, too frequent reason for it. Nevertheless, it should be impossible for anyone who takes a really historical and impartial view of English literature, and who, without that excessive 'classing' of individuals deprecated above, appreciates comparison of them, to put De Quincey far below the highest rank in that literature, if he does not exactly attain to it. Lacking Landor's poetic gift, he may be considered not his equal; if Landor's poetry were barred, he might, with more variety of minor faults, undertake, at least, an equal fight on points of form, and have the odds on his side in point of intellectual quality. To the moral side of psychology, De Quincey did not pay much attention, though there is nothing in the least immoral about him. But his intellectual force was extraordinary, though it was so much divided and so little brought to bear on any single subject or group of subjects that it never accomplished any tangible result worthy of itself. Intellectually, he was by far the greatest of the three men already noticed in this chapter; as an artist, at his best and in his own particular line, he has hardly a superior. At least a postscript to this chapter should, in such a history as the present, remind readers of what is too often forgotten, that the fame of Walter Savage Landor, inadequate to his merits as it is sometimes thought, has been able to overshadow, in no just degree, that of his younger brother, Robert Eyres Landor. Robert's obscurity was, indeed, partly his own fault; for the fallentis semita vitae of a country parsonage was his deliberate and strictly maintained choice; he made little effort (none for a long time) to protest against the attribution of his early play The Count Arezzi to Byron, and of his later story The Fawn of Sertorius, to his brother Walter; and he is believed to have destroyed most of the copies of the three other plays which came between-The Earl of Brecon, Faith's Fraud and The Ferryman. Earlier than this, in 1828, he had written and publishedIX]

Robert Lanaor's Impious Feast

229

a poem, The Impious Feast; and, later than the latest, he gave another prose work, The Fountain of Arethusa. But all his books are rare, and, of the few people who have read him, most, perhaps, know only The Fawn of Sertorius, a prose story blending delightful fantasy with learning, and a genuinely tragic touch. All good judges who have been acquainted with the works of the two brothers seem to have acknowledged the remarkable family likeness, involving no 'copying.' In verse, Robert did not, perhaps, possess either what have been called above the opal flashes of his brother's most ambitious attempts or the exquisite finish of his finest epigrams; and his prose is less ornate. But, for what Dante calls gravitas sententiae, and for phrase worthy of it, he is, probably, Walter's superior. It must be admitted that this family likeness includes-perhaps involves-a somewhat self-willed eccentricity. The Impious Feast (Belshazzar's) is mainly written (with a preface defending the form) in what may be called, in all seriousness, rimed blank verse-or, in other words, verse constructed on the lines of a blank verse paragraph but with rimescompleted at entirely irregular intervals, and occasionally tipped or sandwiched with an Alexandrine. The book is so far from common that a specimen may be given: Still in her native glory unsubdued, And indestructible for force or time That first of mightiest cities, mistress, queen, Even as of old earth's boast and marvel, stood; Imperious, inaccessible, sublime: If changed she might be all that she had been. No conscious doubts abased her regal eye, Rest had not made it weak, but more serene; Those who repelled her power, revered her majesty. Full at her feet wealth's largest fountain streamed; Dominion crowned her head; on either side Were sceptred power and armed strength; she seemed Above mischance imperishably high; Though half the nations of the earth defied, They raged, but could not harm her-fierce disdain Beheld the rebel kingdoms storm in vain. What were their threats to her-Bel's daughter and his pride? Whether this irregular cymbal-accompaniment of rime pleases or displeases in a poem of some six or seven thousand lines-varied only by occasional lyric interludes, sometimes fully strophic in formmust depend much, if not wholly, on individual taste. But the poem, though it has not the craggy splendour of Gebir, is, at least, as good as Southey's non-lyrical epics, and superior to almost all those of the lesser poets mentioned elsewhere.2 3 o T e Landers, Leigh Hunt, De Quincey [CH.IX The Fawn of Sertorius has real charm and interest; its prose companion will certainly surprise and may disappoint, though there are good things in it. The Fountain of Arethusa consistsafter a preliminary narrative, lively enough in matter and picture, of a journey from the depths of a Derbyshire cavern to the Other end of Nowhere-of two volumes of dialogue, rather resembling Southey's Colloquies than the fraternal Conversations, between a certain Antony Lugwardine and divers great men of antiquity, especially Aristotle and Cicero, the talk being more or less framed by a continuation of the narrative, both in incident and description. The general scheme is, of course, familiar enough, and so are some of the details, including the provision of a purely John Bull companion who cannot, like his friend Lugwardine, speak Latin or Greek, and who is rather cruelly killed at the end to make a dying fall. The often-tried contrast of ancient and modern thought and manners presents the usual opportunities for criticism. But the whole is admirably written and gives abundant proof that Robert's humour (as, indeed, we could guess from his letters printed by Forster) was of a somewhat surer kind than Walter's, while his description is sometimes hardly less good though never quite so elaborate. The chapter of the recovery of his farm by the peasant Spanus after his delivery of the fawn to Sertorius is a perfect example of the Landorian method, permeated by an economy of attractions which is hardly to be matched in the works of the more famous brother. That, like almost all classical novels, the book is somewhat overloaded with Charicles-and-Gallus detail, is the only fault, and the passion of the end is real and deep. So it is in the three curious plays (two tragedies and a tragicomic 'drama') of 1841, while their versification, if deficient in lissomeness, is of high quality, and supplies numerous striking short passages somewhat resembling Scott's 'old play' fragmentmottoes. But, on the other hand, the diction and phrasing are among the obscurest in English-concealing, rather than revealing, the thought, motive and even action of the characters. Robert Landor, in short, is a most interesting instance of a 'strong nativity' defrauded of its possible developments, certainly by an unduly recluse life, perhaps by other causes which we do not know. In the case of hardly any other English author would it be more desirable to see, in one of his own phrases, 'what nature first meant [him] to be till some misadventure interposed.' 1 Words already quoted, though not with the application given above, in Oliver Elton's Survey of English Literature, 1780-1830, vol. II, p. 46, the only good recent notice of Robert's work with which the present writer is acquainted.CHAPTER X

JANE AUSTEN THE literary descent of Jane Austen's fiction is plain to trace. Its ancestors were the work of Defoe, the Roger de Coverly papers in The Spectator, the fiction of Fielding and of Richardson, the poems of Cowper and the poetical tales of Crabbe. It belongs to the movement towards naturalism and the study of common life and character, without intrusion of the romantic and the heroic, which prevailed in England in the closing years of the eighteenth century. An impetus, together with a narrowing of its scope, was given to it by Fanny Burney. Of Fanny Burney, it was written in a previous volume of this History that she created the novel of home life. Jane Austen read her novels (in her twenty-first year (1796) she subscribed to Camilla); and, to them, with the works of Crabbe and Cowper, must be allowed an important share in determining the direction that her genius took. She could not, it might be said, have written otherwise than she did; but, from Fanny Burney, she may well have learned how much could be achieved in the novel of home life, and how well worth while was the chronicling of such 'small beer.' Living a quiet and retired life, she found her material in beer even smaller than Fanny Burney's, and her fine instinct moved her to keep to it. There is more oddity and nodosity of humourous character in Fanny Burney's novels than in Jane Austen's, to provide a relief from the main object. As Fanny Burney refined upon Smollett, so Jane Austen refined upon her; and, working rigidly within the limits of what she recognised as the proper field of her talents, she produced novels that came nearer to artistic perfection than any others in the English language. There was nothing of the literary woman in the external affairs of her life and its conduct. Born on 16 December 1775, at Steventon in Hampshire, of which her father was rector, and dying at Winchester on 18 July 1817, she passed the intervening232

Jane Austen

[cH.

years almost entirely in the country. She lived with her family in Bath from 1801 to 1806, and at Southampton from 1806 to 1809. Later, she paid occasional visits to London, where she went not a little to the play; but she never moved in 'literary circles,' was never 'lionised' and never drew much advantage from personal contact with other people of intellect. The moment of her greatest worldly exaltation occurred, probably, on 13 November 1815, when, by order of the prince regent, his librarian, J. S. Clarke, showed her over the library of Carlton house, and intimated that she might dedicate her next novel to his royal highness. A few months later, Clarke, now chaplain and private English secretary to prince Leopold of Coburg, wrote to her suggesting that another novel should be dedicated to the prince, and adding that 'any historical romance, illustrative of the history of the august House of Cobourg, would just now be very interesting.' Jane Austen replied: You are very, very kind in your hints as to the sort of composition which might recommend me at present, and I am fully sensible that an historical romance, founded on the House of Saxe Cobourg, might be much more to the purpose of profit or popularity than such pictures of domestic life in country villages as I deal in. But I could no more write a romance than an epic poem. I could not sit seriously down to write a serious romance under any other motive than to save my life; and if it were indispensable for me to keep it up, and never relax into laughing at myself or at other people, I am sure I should be hung before I had finished the first chapter. No, I must keep to my own style and go on in my own way, and though I may never succeed again in that, I am convinced that I should totally fail in any other. The letter is full of touches characteristic of its author; but the immediate point is Jane Austen's consciousness of her limits. Living a quiet life in the country or at Bath, she kept her eyes steadily upon the comedy and character about her1; and, writing her novels in the common sitting-room of the family, or in the room which she shared with her beloved sister Cassandra, she gave herself no airs. Jane Austen was not a great or an adventurous reader. She told her niece that she regretted not having read more and written less in her younger days. She appears to have read what people in general were reading. Her admiration for Crabbe inspired a characteristically playful jest about her intending to become his wife; Richardson she studied closely. For the most part, she

1 Compare, with this letter, the amusing ' Plan of a novel, according to hints from various quarters,' printed in Austen-Leigh, W. and R. A., Jane Austen, pp. 337 ff.X]

Early Tales

233

read, like other people, the current novels and poems. But, whatever she read, she turned to account-largely, it must be admitted, through her shrewd sense of humour. The aim of making fun of other novels underlay the first work which she completed and sold, Nrorthanger Abbey; and burlesque and parody appear to have been the motives of most of the stories which she wrote while she was a young girl. They are extant in manuscript; and we are told that they are of a slight and flimsy texture, and are generally intended to be nonsensical.... However puerile the matter, they are always composed in pure simple English, quite free from the over-ornamented style which might be expected from so young a writer. Others of these early stories were seriously intended; and the opening of one of them, Kitty, or The Bower, has the very manner of the opening of her published novels. The transition from these earliest efforts to her published work may be found in an unfinished story, which the author refrained from making public, but which was printed by J. E. Austen-Leigh in the second edition (1871) of his Memoir of Jane Austen. Somewhere, so far as can be ascertained, between 1792 and 1796, when Jane Austen was between seventeen and twenty-one years old, she wrote this fragment, Lady Susan. The influence of Richardson upon its form is clear; the tale is written in letters. Possibly, too, Fanny Burney's Evelina may have provided a hint for the situation of a young girl, Frederica. The chief character, Lady Susan Vernon, is a finished and impressive study of a very wicked woman-a cruel and utterly selfish schemer. Jane Austen left the tale unfinished, possibly because she found that Lady Susan was too wicked to be consonant with her own powers of characterdrawing; possibly, because she felt hampered (brilliant letterwriter though she was in her own person, and in the persons of her creation) by the epistolary form. In either case, we see at work that severe artistic self-judgment which is one of the chief causes of her power. About the same time, she completed Elinor and Marianne, a first sketch for Sense and Sensibility, which, like Lady Susan, was written in letters. The author did not offer it for publication, and never afterwards attempted the epistolary form of novel. Jane Austen was twenty-one when she began, in 1796, the earliest of her published works, the novel then called First Impressions, but new-named Pride and Prejudice on its publication, in a revised form, in 1813. In 1797, her father offered the234

Jane Austen

[CH.

manuscript to Cadell, the London publisher, who promptly declined to consider it. First Impressions had been completed some three months when Jane Austen began to write Sense and Sensibility. This novel appears to have been left unfinished for some thirteen years, or, if finished, to have been left unrevised; for it was not till April 1811 that it was in the hands of the printer, and it was published in the autumn of that year, the titlepage stating that it was written 'By a Lady.' This was the first of Jane Austen's books to be published. Its success was immediate. In 1798, she began to write Susan, which was the first draft of Northanger Abbey. This, too, she put by for some years. In 1803, she sold it to a London publisher, who did not issue it; in 1809, she tried in vain to secure publication; in 1816^ she succeeded in recovering the manuscript. She then, perhaps, worked upon it further; yet, she was still doubtful whether she should publish it or not, and, at last, it was posthumously published in two volumes in 1818, at the same time as Persuasion1. In 1803 or 1804 (according to the only piece of evidence-the dates in the water-marks of the paper on which it is written), Jane Austen began a story that she never finished; it was published under the title The Watsons, by J. E. Austen-Leigh in the second edition (1871) of his Memoir. He suggests that the author became aware of the evil of having placed her heroine too low, in such a position of poverty and obscurity as, though not necessarily connected with vulgarity, has a sad tendency to degenerate into ita suggestion which displays little appreciation of the spirit of Jane Austen's work, and is at variance with the facts of the story. Emma Watson, though poor, is gentle-born; and the only hint of vulgarity to be observed in the tale is furnished by an impertinent peer, Lord Osborne, and a hardened flirt in good circumstances, Tom Musgrave. It appears to have been the author's intention that the heroine should ultimately marry a refined and intelligent clergyman, whose character, together with that of Henry Tilney, might have served to counteract the impression produced by that of Mr Collins and of Mr Elton. After 1803, or 1804, there came a gap of several years in Jane Austen's literary work. It was not till 1812 that she began Mansfield Park, which was finished in June 1813, and published in or about May 1814. Emma was begun in January 1814,

1 On the writing and publication of Northanger Abbey, see Austen-Leigh, W. and R. A., Jane Austen, pp. 96-97, 174-5, 230-4, 333, 336, 337.X]

Northanger Abbey

235

finished in March 1815 and published in December 1815. Persuasion, the last-written of her published works, was begun in the spring or summer of 1815 and finished in July 1816. The manuscript was still in her hands at her death in 1817; and was posthumously published in two volumes in 1818. In January 1817, she began to write a new novel, but, after the middle of March, could work no more. Various reasons have been assigned for the gap in her literary production between 1803 or 1804 and 1812. It will be noticed that, from 1812 to 1816, she worked steadily; and further significance of the dates mentioned above is her reluctance to publish anything that had not undergone long meditation and revision. Of the six published novels, Northanger Abbey is, probably, that which comes nearest to being Jane Austen's earliest work. Finished before 1803, it may have been revised after she recovered the manuscript in 1816; but it seems unlikely that it received so complete a revision as did Pride and Prejudice and Sense and Sensibility. In the 'Advertisement by the Authoress,' which prefaced the book on its publication, Jane Austen writes: The public are entreated to bear in mind that thirteen years have passed since it was finished, many more since it was begun, and that during that period places, manners, books, and opinions have undergone considerable changes. The novel paints the world of 1803, not that of 1816. It has, moreover, features that distinguish it from the other published works. It is linked to the earlier stories, in which Jane Austen made fun of the sensational and romantic novels then popular. As the source of Joseph Andrews was the desire to ridicule Pamela, so the source of Northanger Abbey was the desire to ridicule such romantic tales as The Mysteries of Udolpho by Mrs Radcliffe; and, as Joseph Andrews developed into something beyond a parody, so did Northanger A bbey. Secondly, there is a youthful gaiety, almost jollity, about the work, a touch of something very near to farce, which appears in none of the other novels. Catherine Morland, again, may not be the youngest of Jane Austen's heroines (Marianne Dashwood and Fanny Price were certainly younger); but the frank girlishness which makes her delightful gives the impression of being more in tune with the author's spirit than the more critically studied natures of Marianne and Fanny. Be that as it may, Northanger Abbey has more in it of the spirit of youthfulness than any of the other novels. Its idea was, apparently, intended to be the contrast236

Jane A.usten

[CH.

between a normal, healthy-natured girl and the romantic heroines of fiction; and, by showing the girl slightly affected with romantic notions, Jane Austen exhibits the contrast between the world as it is and the world as imagined by the romancers whom she wished to ridicule. The first paragraph of the first chapter, in telling us what Catherine Morland was, tells us, with delicate irony, what she was not; dwelling, in every line, upon the extraordinary beauty and ability of romantic heroines. As the story goes on, we learn that a girl may completely lack this extraordinary beauty and ability without falling into the opposite extremes. At Bath, Catherine Morland comes into contact with silly and vulgar people, the Thorpes; and the contrast makes her candour and right feeling shine all the brighter; while, under the educative influence of wellbred people with a sense of humour, the Tilneys, she develops quickly. Staying at the Tilneys' house, she is cured of her last remnant of romantic folly; and, on leaving her, we are confident that she will make Henry Tilney a sensible and charming wife. Jane Austen's sound and lively sense, her Greek feeling for balance and proportion, are not less clear in Northanger Abbey than in the other novels. None of the others, moreover, gives so clear an impression of the author's enjoyment in writing her story. The scenes of amusement at Bath, the vulgarity and insincerity of Isabella Thorpe, the broader comedy of her brother, the ironic talk of Henry Tilney, all are executed with high-spirited gusto; and we may believe that Jane Austen loved the simple-minded, warm-hearted girl, whom she tenderly steers between the rocks into harbour. With Sense and Sensibility, we revert to the chronological order of publication. Elinor and Marianne, a first sketch of the story, written in the form of letters, appears to have been read aloud by Jane Austen to her family about 1795; in the autumn of 1797, she began to write the novel in its present form; and, after laying it aside for some years, she prepared it for publication in 1809, when, after several changes of abode, she had settled at Chawton in Hampshire. Begun before Northanger Abbey, it lacks the youthful spirit of that novel, while betraying, in a different manner, the inexperience of its author. In construction and characterisation, it is the weakest of Jane Austen's novels. The hearty, vulgar Mrs Jennings, her bearish son-in-law, Mr Palmer, her silly daughter, Mrs Palmer, provide comedy, it is true; but this comedy is mere 'comic relief'-a separate matter from the story; and it is not fitted to the story with perfectx]

Sense and Sensibility

237

adroitness. In the conduct of the novel, the feebleness of Edward Ferrars, the nonentity of colonel Brandon and the meanness of the Steele sisters are all a little exaggerated, as if Jane Austen's desire to make her point had interfered with her complete control of her material. It is, to some extent, the same with Mrs Dashwood and her two elder daughters. Anxiety to demonstrate that strong feelings are not incompatible with selfrestraint, and to show the folly of an exaggerated expression of sentiment, has resulted in a touch of something like acerbity in the treatment of Mrs Dashwood and Marianne (suggesting that Jane Austen was personally angry with them), and in a too rarely dissipated atmosphere of reproof about Elinor. The spirit of pure comedy is not so constant in Sense and Sensibility as in any other novel that Jane Austen wrote; though the second chapter, which describes the famous discussion between John Dashwood and his wife, is, perhaps, the most perfect to be found in any of her novels. Jane Austen's next novel, Pride and Prejudice, published in 1813, is her most brilliant work. The wit in it sparkles. She herself thought that it needed more relief. She wrote to her sister, Cassandra, with a characteristic couching of sober sense in playful exaggeration: The work is rather too light, and bright, and sparkling; it wants shade; it wants to be stretched out here and there with a long chapter of sense, if it could be had; if not, of solemn specious nonsense, about something unconnected with the story; an essay on writing, a critique on Walter Scott, or the history of Buonoparte, on anything that would form a contrast, and bring the reader with increased delight to the playfulness and epigrammatism of the general style. She did not perceive, perhaps, how the story gains in gravity and quiet when it comes to the change in Elizabeth Bennet's feeling for Darcy. This part of the book offers a foretaste of the sympathetic understanding which, later, was to give its peculiar charm to Persuasion; and, besides supplying the needed relief to the flashing wit with which Jane Austen reveals her critical insight into people with whom she did not sympathise, it affords a signal example of her subtle method. The story is seen almost wholly through the eyes of Elizabeth Bennet; yet, without moving from this standpoint, Jane Austen contrives to show what was happening, without Elizabeth's knowledge, in Elizabeth's mind. To a modern reader, the great blot on the book is the author's neglect to lift Darcy sufficiently above the level of aristocratic brutality: it has constantly to be238

Jane Atusten

[CH.

remembered that, in Jane Austen's day and social class, birth and fortune were regarded with more respect than they are now. Darcy's pride was something other than snobbishness; it was the result of a genuinely aristocratic consciousness of merit, acting upon a haughty nature. To Jane Austen herself, Elizabeth Bennet was 'as delightful a creature as ever appeared in print'; and Pride and Prejudice (immediately upon its publication) was 'her own darling child.' With subsequent generations, it has been the most popular of her novels, but not because of Elizabeth or Darcy, still less for sweet Jane Bennet and her honest Bingley. The outstanding merit of the book is its witty exposition of foolish and disagreeable people: Mr Bennet (he must be included for his moral indolence, however he may delight by his humour), Mrs Bennet, Elizabeth's younger sisters, Lady Catherine de Bourgh, best of all, Mr Collins. Taken by itself, this study of a pompous prig is masterly; but, in Pride and Prejudice, nothing can be taken by itself. The art of the book is so fine that it contains no character which is without effect upon the whole; and, in a novel dealing with pride and with prejudice, the study of such toadyism and such stupidity as that of Mr Collins gives and gains incalculable force. Jane Austen's next novel, Mansfield Park, is less brilliant and sparkling than Pride and Prejudice, and, while entering no less subtly than Persuasion into the fine shades of the affections and feelings, it is the widest in scope of the six. Begun, probably, in the autumn of 1812, and finished in the summer of 1813, this was the first novel which Jane Austen had written without interruption, and remains the finest example of her power of sustaining the interest throughout a long and quiet narrative. The development of Fanny Price, from the shy little girl into the woman who marries Edmund Bertram, is one of Jane Austen's finest achievements in the exposition of character; and, in all fiction, there are few more masterly devices of artistic truth than the effect of Crawford's advances upon Fanny herself and upon Fanny's importance in the reader's mind. In Mansfield Park, the study of Fanny Price is only one of several excellent studies of young women-the two Bertram girls and Miss Crawford being chief among the rest. Mansfield Park is the book in which Jane Austen most clearly shows the influence of Richardson, whose Sir Charles Grandison was one of her favourite novels; and her genius can scarcely be more happily appreciated than by a study of the manner in which she weaves into material of a Richardsonianx] Mansfield Park. Emma 239 fineness the brilliant threads of such witty portraiture of mean or foolish people as that of Lady Bertram, of Mrs Norris, of Fanny's own family, of Mr Yates, Mr Rushworth and others. Edmund Bertram, though presenting a great advance on the Edward Ferrars of Sense and Sensibility, suffers, in his character of 'hero,' from something of the same disability, a weakness which, to some extent, interferes with the reader's interest in his fortune. And there appears to be some slight uncertainty in the drawing of Sir Thomas Bertram, whom we are scarcely prepared by the early part of the story to find a man of so much good sense and affection as he appears later. Against him, however, must be set the author's notable success in the character of Henry Crawford -an example of male portraiture that has never been equalled by a woman writer. One subsidiary person in the novel may lend to it a personal interest. It has been suggested1 that Fanny's brother, William Price, the young sailor, was drawn from Jane Austen's recollections of what one of her own sailor brothers, Charles Austen, had been, twelve or fourteen years earlier. Emma, the fourth and last novel which Jane Austen published in her lifetime, was begun in January 1814, and finished in March 1815, to appear in the following December. Jane Austen was now at the height of her powers. The book was written rapidly and surely; and the success of her previous novels doubtless encouraged her to express herself with confidence in the way peculiarly her own. She chose, as she declared, 'a heroine whom no one but myself will much like'; and, in delineating her, she made no sacrifices to any public desire for what Mary Russell Mitford, in passing judgment on her work, called 'the beau id6al of the female character.' Emma is a tiresome girl, full of faults; and yet, far from not being 'much liked,' she has called forth more fervent affection than any other of Jane Austen's characters. Jane Austen herself admired Elizabeth Bennet; she loved little Fanny Price; Emma, she both loved and admired, without a shade of patronage or a hint of heroine-worship. That Emma should be loved, as she is loved, for her faults as well as for her virtues, is one among Jane Austen's many claims to the rank of greatness in her art. Scarcely less skilful is the portrait of the wise and patient Knightley, whose reproofs to the wayward girl never shake the reader's conviction of his humanity and charm. The laughter of the comic spirit never comes near to sharpness in Emma, except in the case of Mrs Elton; and, even 1 Austen-Leigh, W. and P. A., Jane Austen, p. 298.240

7ane Austen

[CH.

with Mrs Elton, we feel, as we scarcely feel with the Steele sisters or with Mr Collins, that Jane Austen is not allowing the lady to show herself at her very worst. For Mr Woodhouse, Miss Bates and Harriet Smith she clearly had some degree of affection, which she communicates to her readers. And, with regard to Harriet Smith, it is to be noticed that, rarely as Jane Austen touches our pity, she feels this helpless, bewildered creature to be a fit occasion for compassion, as her more capable women are not, and allows us to be touched by Harriet Smith's regrets for Robert Martin and the Abbey Mill farm. There are, we may add, few finer examples in fiction of suggestive reticence than Jane Austen's treatment of Jane Fairfax. The mystery of the story demands that we should be kept in the dark about her; yet we feel that we know her as well as any character that Jane Austen created. After Emma, Jane Austen published nothing in her lifetime. The posthumous novel Persuasion was begun in the spring or summer of 1815 and finished in July 1816, the last two chapters being written a little later, to take the place of the original last chapter, which did not satisfy the author. Then she put the manuscript by; and her ill-health and death caused it to remain unpublished. Signs of failing energy and spirits have been observed by some in Persuasion. The interpolated story told to Anne Eliot by Mrs Smith may be admitted to be dull, for Jane Austen; and some weight may be attached to her statement that Anne Eliot was 'almost too good for me.' The tone of the novel, as a whole, is graver and tenderer than that of any of the other five; but woven in with its gravity and tenderness is the most delicate and mellow of all Jane Austen's humour. Such imperfections as the novel may have may be interpreted with equal fairness as signs of growth rather than of decay. Jane Austen was changing her tone, and had not yet completely mastered the new conditions. Whether Anne Eliot was 'too good' for her or not, she achieved the difficult feat of making her interesting from start to finish. The same may be said of captain Wentworth. In himself, he is an interesting personage; but, in Persuasion, Jane Austen accomplishes more perfectly than in any other of her novels the task of revealing the interest which lies in the interplay of ordinary persons. All the characters in Persuasion are less sharply accentuated than those in the other novels. In Sir Walter Eliot and Miss Eliot, Mrs Clay and Mr and Mrs Charles Musgrave, Jane Austen is making milder fun than usual of less prominent 'humours' than usual. The charm of the novel lies inx]

The Novel of Character

241

the luminous reactions of one character upon another, and of all upon each; and, considering its difference from the other novels, it suggests that Jane Austen, had she lived, would have excelled in fiction of another kind than that which she had hitherto practised. From one point of view, then, Persuasion may be regarded as Jane Austen's most characteristic novel. If it lacks the sharp wit and the high spirits of Pride and Prejudice, and the wide scope of Mansfield Park, it reveals more than they do of the interest which the seeing eye may find in ordinary people. Therein lies Jane Austen's individual quality. We have seen how conscious she was of her peculiar bent, and how resolute to keep to it. Maria Edgeworth, as Scott remarked, can offer us higher life, more romantic incident and broader comedy. Of romance, Jane Austen has none, either in character or in setting. The rocks and streams, the forests and castles, which form the furniture of the romantics, have no place in her novels. This was due to no want of appreciation of natural beauty. The opening of chapter ix of Sense and Sensibility would be sufficient to prove the contrary. Elinor, Marianne and Edward's talk on the picturesque in chapter xvIII of the same novel reveals once more the justice, the Greek sense and balance, that determine all Jane Austen's work; and, in chapter viii of Mansfield Park, we find her giving the capital example of her principle. The party approaching Sotherton discusses its appearance; yet, the prominent interest of the scene is not the picturesqueness of Sotherton, but the relation of Sotherton and of its owner, Mr Rushworth, to the hopes and fears of women among the visitors. In her reaction from romance, Jane Austen dispensed with all aids borrowed from romance. The fall of Louisa Musgrave from the steps on the Cobb at Lyme Regis (an incident strictly consonant with the character and aims of Louisa); the fall of Marianne on the hill at Barton; the sudden return of Sir Thomas Bertram to Mansfield park-these are the most exciting incidents in the six novels. The very elopements are contemplated indirectly, and used, not for their own dramatic force, but for their effect upon the lives of others than the runaways. Character, not incident, was Jane Austen's aim; and, of character, whether in itself marked, or interesting only in its interactions, she found enough in the narrow circle and the humdrum life encountered by her immediate view. Humdrum, it certainly was. During Jane Austen's working years, while England was fighting for existence or newly triumphant, while the prince regent

E. L. XII. CH. X.

16242

Jane Austen

[CH.

was in the hey-day of his luxury and while revolutionary ideas were winning for poets and reformers present shame and future glory, there can have been no lack of bright colour and sharp contrast in life. Local humours, ripe and rich in the days of Fielding, can hardly have been planed away by the action of the growing refinement. Jane Austen, as novelist, is blind to all this multicoloured life. There are no extremes, social or other, in her books. The peasantry is scarcely mentioned; of noblemen, there is not one. Of set purpose, she keeps her eye fixed upon the manners of a small circle of country gentlefolk, who seem to have nothing to do but to pay calls, picnic, take walks, drive out, talk and dance. Of dancing, Jane Austen herself was fond; private theatricals are considered a little too heady an amusement for that circle. It is a world of idle men-her clergy are frequently absentees-and of unoccupied women, not one of whom is remarkable for any fineness or complexity of disposition or intellect, or for any strong peculiarity of circumstance. She shows, moreover, no ardent moral purpose or intellectual passion which might lend force where force was not to be found; she never uses her characters as pegs for ethical or metaphysical doctrines. Newman remarked of her that she had not a dream of the high catholic '0os. There are no great passions in her stories. She rarely appeals to her reader's emotions, and never by means of the characters that she most admires or likes. It may be said that, on the whole, she appears to trust and to value love-it was observed by Whately that all Anne Eliot's troubles arose from her not yielding to her youthful love for Wentworth-but, beyond that, it would be unsafe to go. With these limitations, natural and chosen, and out of these unpromising materials, Jane Austen composed novels that come near to artistic perfection. Her greatest gift was that sense of balance and proportion to which reference has been already made. To everything that she saw, she applied this touchstone of good sense. Next came her extraordinarily perspicacious and sensitive understanding, not of women only, but of men as well. Notwithstanding her sheltered life and the moderate amount of her learning, she saw deeply and clearly to the springs of action, and understood the finest shades of feeling and motive. She was sensitive to the slightest deviation from the standard of good breeding and good sense; and any deviation (there can be no doubt of it) appealed to her sense of fun. Gossip by Miss Mitfordx] Her Discrimination 243 and, perhaps, others, brought her a reputation for acerbity and spleen. She reveals scarcely a hint of either in her writings; she is scrupulously fair even to Mrs Norris and to Mr Collins. Her attitude as satirist is best explained by a quotation from chapter xi of Pride and Prejudice. Says Darcy: 'The wisest and the best of men-nay, the wisest and best of their actions-may be rendered ridiculous by a person whose first object in life is a joke.' 'Certainly,' replied Elizabeth-'there are such people, but I hope I am not one of them. I hope I never ridicule what is wise or good. Follies and nonsense, whims and inconsistencies, do divert me, I own, and I laugh at them whenever I can.' And her sense of fun was proportioned to the follies which diverted her. Gross humours she disliked in other writers' novels, and never attempted in her own. With the sharpest and most delicate of wit, as deft in expression as it was subtle in perception, she diverted herself and her readers with the fine shades of folly in a circle of which the rudest member might be called refined. Her fun, moreover, was always fair, always goodtempered and always maintained in relation to her standard of good sense and good manners. To her delicate perception and her fairness, combined, is due what Whately called her Shakespearean discrimination in fools. Mr Collins could not be confused with Mr Elton, nor Lucy Steele with Mrs Elton, nor the proud Miss Eliot with the proud Misses Bertram. Jane Austen clings to her fairness even when it seems to tell against her favourite characters. She makes Fanny Price unhappy in her parents' home at Portsmouth, where a feebler novelist would have attempted to show her heroine in a light purely favourable; she attributes to Emma Woodhouse innumerable little failings. This just and consistent fidelity to character plays a large part in the subtlety of her discrimination, not only in fools but in less obviously diverting people. Her clarity of imaginative vision, and her fidelity to what she saw with it, make her characters real. Imagine Elizabeth Bennet, Elinor Dashwood, Emma Woodhouse to be living women today, and at a first meeting in a drawingroom we might not know which was which. After seeing them through Jane Austen's eyes, we know them as thoroughly as we know the characters of Shakespeare; for, like Shakespeare, she knew all about the creatures of her observation and imagination. It is not only that she could tell her family and friends particulars of their lives which did not appear in the novels, or that she left their natures so plain that later writers may amuse themselves by 16-2244

rane Austen

[CH. X

continuing their histories1. They are seen in the round, and are true, in the smallest details, to the particular nature. Modest as she was, and working purposely in a very restricted field, Jane Austen set herself a very high artistic aim. To imagine and express personages, not types; to develop and preserve their characters with strict fidelity; to reveal them not by external analysis but by narrative in which they should appear to reveal themselves; to attain, in the construction of her novels, as near as might be, to a perfection of form that should be the outcome of the interaction of the natures and motives in the story: these were her aims, and these aims she achieved, perhaps, with more consistency and more completeness than any other novelist except, it may be, de Maupassant. In the earlier novels, her wit diverts her readers with its liveliness; her later work shows a tenderer, graver outlook and a deepening of her study of character. Through all alike, there runs the endearing charm of a shrewd mind and a sweet nature. 1 Cf. Brinton, Sybil G., Old Friends and New Fancies, 1913.CHAPTER XI

LESSER NOVELISTS JANE AUSTEN did not found any school; and her artistic strictness is not shown by any of her contemporaries or immediate successors. Several among them, especially women writers, took advantage of the new fields which she had opened to fiction; but, in most cases, the influence of the earlier and less regular novel is evident, and perhaps the influence of a period full of contrasts and extremes. In the novels of Susan Edmondstone Ferrier there is something of the rough sarcasm of Smollett, mingled with a strong didactic flavour and with occasional displays of sentiment that may be due to Mackenzie. To her personal friend Scott, she may have owed something in her studies of Scottish life, but Maria Edgeworth was her principal model. Her first novel, Marriage, was written in 1810, though it was not published till 1818, when it appeared anonymously. Marriage is full of vigorous work. The studies of the highland family into which an English lady of aristocratic birth and selfish temper marries by elopement are spirited and humourous; but the story rambles on through a good many years; and the character of Lady Juliana, poor, proud and worldly, is but a thin thread on which to hang the tale of three generations. The Inheritance, published in 1824, has more unity. Destiny, published in 1831, is chiefly remarkable for the character of McDow, the minister. To compare McDow with Mr Collins is to see the difference between Jane Austen and Susan Ferrier; but the latter, with her coarse workmanship succeeds in achieving a picture full of humour. The novel becomes very sentimental and strained towards the close, a criticism which, also, holds true of The Inheritance; but Susan Ferrier was a novelist of power, whose work is still fresh and interesting. Coarse as her workmanship may be compared with that of Jane Austen, it is refined and delicate by the side of that of a remarkable woman, Frances, the mother of Anthony and Augustus,246

Lesser Novelists

[CH.

Trollope. Mrs Trollope's best work was done in middle-age, and may be found in two novels, The Vicar of Wrexhill (1837) and The Widow Barnaby (1838). The Vicar of Wrexhill is a book of virulent malignity, in which the chief character is a clergyman of evangelical beliefs. He is licentious, suave, cold and cruel; and the force with which his vices are shown to be mingled with his religion could only have been displayed by a novelist of courageous and powerful mind. Be the character possible or impossible, it is throughout credible in the reading; and Mrs Trollope never permits her reader to escape from the terror which the man and his deeds arouse. The Widow Barnaby is written in more humourous mood. The chief character is the buxom widow of a country apothecary, who poses as a woman of fortune. Vulgar, selfish and cruel, she is still a source of constant delight to readers who have stomached coarser things in Smollett. Rough as Mrs Trollope's work is, and crude, especially in the drawing of minor characters, her power and her directness remain unmatched by any English author of her sex, save Aphra Behn. There is something, perhaps, of Jane Austen's influence to be traced in the novels of Catherine Grace Gore. Mrs Gore, like Mrs Trollope, was a very prolific worker. Her reputation has suffered at Thackeray's hands. From Lords and Liveries, by the author of Dukes and D4jeuners, Heart and Diamonds, Marchionesses and Milliners, one of Thackeray's Novels by Eminent Hands, it might be imagined that Mrs Gore was nothing but a novelist of 'high life.' True, she liked to give her characters titles of nobility; and that was exactly the feature in her work which would attract Thackeray's notice. But, in Mrs Armytage, or Female Domination (1836) and in Mothers and Daughters (1831) there is considerable ability. In Mothers and Daughters may be traced clearly an attempt to follow Jane Austen in fidelity to life and in unity of form and matter; and the study of the heartless 'society' mother, Lady Maria Willingham, is a more finely-painted piece of work than Susan Ferrier's more extravagantly designed Lady Juliana Douglas. In Mrs Armytage, Mrs Gore came nearest to being a novelist of the first rank. The chief character in this tale of landed gentry in Yorkshire is a woman of heroic and domineering temper, whose rather weakwilled son has married the pretty daughter of a vulgar bettingman. Broad contrasts, like that between Mrs Armytage and the coarse and good-hearted relatives of her daughter-in-law, and fine contrasts like that between Mrs Armytage and her son, areXI]

Mrs Gore. Mary She/ley

247

contrived with a sincere but not too subtle art, so as to throw into relief the nature of this terrible and oppressive but, nevertheless, majestic woman. In all the unhappiness that she causes, she is never altogether hateful; but, at the close, the author refrains from exaggerating her punishment. The book shows a fitness and justice that make it comparable to the work of Jane Austen, though it is quite unlike that work in its gravity, its didactic tone and its use of incident. Letitia Elizabeth Landon, the poet, scarcely survives now as a novelist, although Ethel Churchill, her last and best attempt in fiction (1837), may take its place among the second-rate novels of the day. So, too, may the Granby (1826) of Thomas Henry Lister. Lister was a rather ladylike novelist, which, perhaps, accounts for the erroneous attribution to him of Mrs Cradock's novel, Hulse House. But there is good work in Granby, with its fine, manly hero and its baseborn, reckless, but not unattractive villain. Lister moves easily among titles of nobility, and, in the course of this story, presents us with an aristocratic coxcomb whom it is difficult not to regard as a perverted Darcy. Lister is clever at smart conversation, which seems to have been much valued in its own day, however tiresome it may appear now; and he succeeds in conveying an impression of a real world, inhabited by real people. He has his interest, therefore, for the student of external manners. Meanwhile, the novel of terror, of which Jane Austen had made fun in Northanger Abbey, continued to flourish, though in a modified form; and women were prominent among those who wrote this kind of fiction. It was a woman, and a woman of a later period in its history, who produced the finest work of genius to be found in this class of writings, Frankenstein, or The Modern Prometheus (1818). Its author, Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley, has left on record the circumstances of its production. With her husband, Byron and Polidori, she occupied part of a wet summer in Switzerland in reading volumes of ghost stories translated from German into French. Byron suggested that each member of the party should write a ghost story. Mary Shelley waited long for an idea. Conversations between Shelley and Byron about the experiments of Darwin and the principle of life at length suggested to her the subject of Frankenstein. At first I thought but of a few pages or of a short tale; but Shelley urged me to develop the idea at greater length. I certainly did not owe the248

Lesser Novelists

[CH.

suggestion of one incident, nor scarcely of one train of feeling, to my husband, and yet but for his incitement it would never have taken the form in which it was presented to the world. From this declaration I must except the preface. As far as I can recollect, it was entirely written by him. It has been held, nevertheless, that Mary Shelley, unaided, was incapable of writing so fine a story. 'Nothing,' wrote Richard Garnett, 'but an absolute magnetising of her brain by Shelley's can account for her having risen so far above her usual self as in Frankenstein.' Comparison of Frankenstein with a later work by Mary Shelley, The Last Man (1826), may, perhaps, temper that judgment. The Last Man is a much longer work than Frankenstein. It describes the destruction, spread over many years, of the entire human race, all but one man, by an epidemic disease. The book shows many signs of effort and labour. The imaginative faculty often runs wild, and often flags. The social and political foresight displayed is but feeble. The work is unequal and extravagant. Yet, in The Last Man, there are indubitable traces of the power that created Frankenstein; and, if Mary Shelley, working in unhappy days at a task too comprehensive for her strength, could produce such a book as The Last Man, there is no reason for doubting her capacity, while in stimulating society and amid inspiring conversation, to reach the imaginative height of Frankenstein. To a modern reader, the introductory part, which relates to the Englishmen who met Frankenstein in the Polar seas, seems too long and elaborate; when the story becomes confined to Frankenstein and the monster that he created, the form is as pure as the matter is engrossing. And, unlike most tales of terror, Frankenstein is entirely free from anything absurd. The intellectual, no less than the emotional, level is maintained throughout. In Mary Shelley's other principal novels, Valperga (1823), a romance of medieval Italy, to which her father Godwin gave some finishing touches, and Lodore (1835), a partly autobiographical story, there is clear evidence of a strong imagination and no little power of emotional writing, though both lack sustained mastery. Frankenstein is founded upon scientific research, as if the time had come when it was necessary to give some rational basis to the terror which novel-readers had been content to accept for its own sake. A later writer, Catherine Crowe, went further than Mary Shelley in this direction. Mrs Crowe not only delighted in ghosts and similar occasions of terror; in The Night Side of Nature (1848), she attempted to find a scientific, or, as we should now callxi] Catherine Crowe.

George Croly 249

it, a 'psychic' explanation of such things; and the result is an engaging volume of mingled story and speculation. In her two novels, Adventures of Susan Hopley; or Circumstantial Evidence (1841) and The Story of Lilly Dawson (1847), the horrors owe but little to the supernatural. Robberies, murders and abductions are the chief ingredients. Mrs Crowe had some power of imagination, or, rather, perhaps, of ingenuity in spinning tales of crime. But her work is very ragged. She introduces so many characters and so many unrelated episodes, that any skill which she may show in weaving them together at the close of the book comes too late to console the still bewildered reader. Though the fiction of George Croly deals but little with the supernatural, it has, on one side, a distinct affinity with the novel of terror. The principal aim of his chief novel, Salathiel (1829), is to overwhelm the reader with monstrous visions of terror and dismay. The theme of the story is the destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans under Titus; and here, as in Marston (1846), a romance of the French revolution and the subsequent European warfare, Croly touches, on another side, the historical novelists. But he has not more affinity with Scott than with Mrs Radcliffe. His models are two: Byron, from whom he takes the character of his heroes, persons who do terrific deeds and seldom cease complaining of their dark and tragic fate; and De Quincey, on whom he modelled his prose. Often turgid, often extravagant, often vulgar in its display, like that of his exemplar, Croly's prose not seldom succeeds in impressing the reader by its weight and volume; and he had a large vision of his subject. A dash of humour might have made him a great novelist. Yet it will remain strange that anyone writing historical romances in the heyday of the fame of Walter Scott could write so wholly unlike Scott as did Croly. The difference between them was due partly to a sturdy and pugnacious independence in Croly of which there is much further evidence in his life and writings. Another cause must be sought for the difference between Scott and George Payne Rainsford James. As a historical novelist, James was a professed follower of Scott. In the preface to the third edition of his first novel, Richelieu (1829), James relates how he sent the MS to Scott, who, after keeping it for some months, returned it with a letter full of kindness and encouragement. Without a particle of Scott's genius, James was a quick, patient, indefatigable worker. He poured forth historical novel after historical novel, all conscientiously accurate in historical250

Lesser Novelists

[CH.

fact, all dressed in well-invented incident, all diffuse and pompous in style, and all lifeless, humourless and characterless. James fell an easy victim to Thackeray's gift for parody; but the modern reader will wonder why Thackeray took the trouble to parody James, unless it were that the task was agreeably easy and that James's popularity was worth a shaft of ridicule. There is far more life and spirit about another author of fiction half-historical, half-terrific, who also owed not a little to the encouragement of Scott. William Harrison Ainsworth has kept some of his popularity, while that of James has faded, because Ainsworth, as little able as was James to unite history with the study of character, had a vigorous imagination and wrote with gusto. Rookwood (1834), Jack Sheppard (1839), The Tower of London (1840), Guy Fawkes (1841), Old St Paul's (1841), The Lancashire Witches (1848), The South Sea Bubble (1868): these and others in a very long list of romances can still delight many grown men as well as boys, thanks to their energetic movement and their vivid though rough style of narration. The coming of Scott did not suffice to divert certain older channels of fiction that were still, if feebly, flowing. And, in the work of Frederick Marryat, a stream that had sprung from Smollett received a sudden access of volume and power. At one time, it was customary to regard captain Marryat as a genial amateur, a sea-captain who wrote sea-stories for boys. The fact that, from 1806 to 1830, Marryat served actively and ably in the navy did not prevent him from being a novelist of very near the first rank. He had little mastery over the construction of plot; his satire (as exhibited, for instance, in Mr Easy's expositions of the doctrines of liberty) is very thin and shallow. But, in the deft delineation of oddity of character he is worthy of mention with Sterne or with Dickens; and, in the narration of stirring incident, he was unrivalled in his day. Indeed, excepting Walter Scott, Marryat was the only novelist of his period who might lay claim to eminence. To read the novels of his prime: Peter Simple (1834), Mr Midshipman Easy (1836), Japhet in search of a Father (1836) or Jacob Faithful (1837), is to find a rich humour, a wide knowledge of men and things, intense and telling narrative, an artistic restraint which forbids extravagance or exaggeration and an all but Tolstoy-like power over detail. Within his narrower limits, captain Marryat, at his best, is a choicer artist than Defoe, whom, in many points, he resembles-among others, in having had hisXI]

Marryat. Hook

251

finest work regarded, for a time, as merely reading 'for boys.' From that implied reproach, Marryat's best novels, like Defoe's Robinson Crzsoe, have, ultimately, escaped. Indeed, the stories that Marryat himself intended for boys-Miasternan Ready (1841), The Settlers in Canada (1844) and others-are found to have qualities that make them welcome to grown men. In Marryat, there are touches here and there of the lower humour of Smollett, but these occur almost entirely in his early work, written before he had learned his business as novelist. His mind, moreover, was finer in quality than that of another writer, to whom, doubtless, he owed something, Theodore Hook. Of Hook's fiction, it is difficult to write. It had a wide influence; and it is of little value. It lacks all the higher qualities, but suggested possibilities to many a later writer. The nine volumes of Hook's novels, Sayings and Doings (1826-9), were, in their own day, very popular: to a modern reader, even the best of them, Gervase Skinner, seems flimsy, vulgar and trivial. However, there is a lively spirit in them; and Hook's value to English fiction seems to lie in his very freedom and 'modernity.' He reminded fiction-for, indeed, she seemed to have forgotten what Fielding had made clear-that all life was her province. He showed that it was possible to be 'up-to-date,' free (and also easy), without degrading the art; thus, he opened a way to minds like Marryat's which had a truer originality and a fresher vision. Before long, Dickens was to appear, to make supreme use of the lately won liberty. Before this chapter is brought to a close, two Scottish novelists should not be left without mention. John Galt, in The Ayrshire Legatees, The Entail and The Annals of the Parish, gave admirably minute and real studies of rural life in Scotland, full of strong delineation of character and forcible detail. As imaginative pictures of homely life under perfectly known conditions, Galt's novels occupy an important place in fiction. The fame of the Waverley novels tempted him later to compete with Scott in historical fiction, in which he succeeded but moderately. David Macbeth Moir wrote for his friend, Galt, the last chapters of a novel, The Last of the Lairds, and was the author of The Life of Mansie Wauch, Tailor in Dalkeith (1828), a partly satirical, and very amusing, study of humble Scottish 1 In connection with Marryat and the sea-novel two other writers of the time are worth mention: William Nugent Glascock and Frank Chamier.252 Lesser Novelists [CH. xi character, so shrewdly observed and neatly set down that the reader regrets its interruption by the interpolated romance The Curate of Suverdsio. The period, as a whole, was productive of no great fiction, and of very little that can be considered first-rate. Neither Scott nor Jane Austen inspired any eminent follower; and the time, in spite of an immense production of romances and novels, did little more than keep the art of fiction alive till the coming of Dickens and of Thackeray.CHAPTER XII

THE OXFORD MOVEMENT THE remarkable influence which affected English religion in the middle of the nineteenth century could not have failed to affect English literature. But the one stood apart from the other in a way unusual in English history. At the age of the reformation, at the time of the Laudian movement under Charles I and in the time of the later Caroline divines, religious literature occupied a prominent, sometimes a commanding, position in the eyes of all who were alive to the currents of public life. It is true that the great dramatic literature of Elizabeth's day was concerned very little with the wranglings of divines; but no record of the literary giants of those days could omit the name of Hooker, whose influence on English prose was immense. Jeremy Taylor was a great man of letters, and, in Dryden's day, theological questions were the staple of many a discussion which might appear to belong to pure literature. But the Oxford movement seemed, throughout almost its whole course, to stand apart from the literature of the day. Men went on for a long time thinking and writing in other fields of learning as if there were no such persons as Newman and Keble and Pusey; or, like Carlyle, dismissed them contemptuously from their thoughts as having but the brain of rabbits. Only very gradually was the persistence of their work felt outside religious or academic circles; and, to the end, there was not more than one of their writers who seriously affected the current of English letters. Mark Pattison, long after 'the Tractarian infatuation' had ceased to influence him, complained that there was 'no proper public for either' theology or church history. But, none the less, the Oxford movement, as it came to be called, formed a most important epoch in literature: yet, for a long while it stood apart, as philosophy commonly does, from the ordinary work of men who wrote and men who read. Nor was it, at least till late in its progress, affected by foreign254 lie Oxford Movement [cH. influences. James Anthony Froude, who, at one time, had run hotfoot with the movement, said, in later life, that its whole history, if not that of the English church, would have been different if Newman had known German; and the extremely superficial generalisation has been widely accepted. It would be more true to say that with the German theology of the period, its theorising, its sentimentalism and its haste, the tractarian leaders had no affinity. Those who knew it, such as Pusey and Hugh James Rose, believed that they saw through and beyond it. The other leaders at least knew what its principles were, and decisively rejected them. Of Italian theology, on the other hand, there was practically none; but the religious aspect of Manzoni's I promessi Sposi at one time deeply affected Newman. The great French catholic writers gradually became known to the English leaders. Newman paid great attention to the church in France. French devotional books were translated and edited in great abundance, by Pusey and others, after 1845, and some of the later disciples of the school, such as Liddon, owed a great deal to the French manner and method. But, for the most part, tractarian literature was insular and had its roots deep in the past. The catholic influences which affected it belonged to the early, not the modern, church. Yet, it is impossible to study the Oxford movement without seeing that it was essentially one with the romantic movement which had re-created the literature of Germany and France. In France, Chateaubriand's Gdnie du Christianisme had been the signal for a reaction, in the world of letters, in favour of Christianity; and Joseph de Maistre, who had most powerfully supported it, looked on the church of England with considerable favour. Later, the career of Lamennais was followed with great interest in England, and Newman had deep sympathy on many points with Lacordaire. Nor was the movement without its affinities with Germany. The spiritual romanticism of Schiller, and the genius of the great Goethe on its medieval side, appealed, at least through English disciples and copyists, to some of the feelings which gave strength to the Oxford movement. From Goethe to Walter Scott is an easy step: he turned men's minds, said Newman, in the direction of the middle ages, and the Oxford leaders themselves knew how much they owed to the Wizard of the North. Behind their severity there was a vein of noble sentiment akin to his. Keble even, when he traced the influence that Scott had exercised in substituting his manly realities for the flimsy, enervating literature which peopled the shelves of thoseXII]

Tractarianism and Politics

255

who read chiefly for amusement, allowed himself to wonder what might have happened if this gifted writer had become the poet of the Church in as eminent a sense as he was the poet of the Border and of Highland chivalry. The tractarians shared, with Scott at least, the understanding delight in a noble past; and the bizarre and critical genius of Peacock was, also, by their side. The liberalism which he abhorred was to them, too, the great enemy. For a certain political kinship in the early tractarians must not be ignored. Later developments have caused a distinction to be drawn between the liberalism which Keble denounced and the party which, in Gladstone, had for leader one of the most devout disciples of the Oxford movement. But the whigs were believed to be, and historically had been, an anti-church party; and, though the liberalism which the Oxford writers opposed was not actually the whig party, it was, in many of its principles, closely allied to that party, and ultimately absorbed the party's members into its fold and under its name. Tractarianism was certainly not a tory movement, but it was opposed to liberalism in all its aspects; and it soon shed from among its supporters those who, even if, like J. A. Froude, they remained conservative in some political principles, found themselves, when, like Arthur Clough and Mark Pattison, they looked deep into their hearts, to be fundamentally liberal and 'progressive.' To the philosophyof conservatism the Oxford leaders were much indebted. Dean Church says that the Oriel men disliked Coleridge 'as a misty thinker'; but, in the ideas which influenced them, apart from their strictly theological expression, they were undoubtedly, to some extent, his debtors; though Newman recognised that what, to him, were fundamental-'the church, sacraments, doctrines, etc.'-were, to the philosopher, rather symbols than truths. And, in the region of pure poetry, there was much in their thought which was in sympathy with Wordsworth in his loftiest moods. But all this, though it may illustrate the origin, the character and the affinities of the Oxford movement, tells nothing as to its direct antecedents. Of these, it may suffice to say that the tractarians represented and continued a tradition which, though it had been submerged, had never died: a tradition of unity with the great Caroline divines and the theologians whom they had taken for their models. If this, in churchmanship as well as in literary expression, had become 'high and dry' among those who, in the early nineteenth century, might be regarded as its direct256 The Oxford Movement [CH. representatives, there were others in whom the continuity of thought is unmistakable. Dean Church says: Higher ideas of the Church than the popular and political notion of it, higher conceptions of it than those of the ordinary evangelical theology-echoes of the meditations of a remarkable Irishman, Mr Alexander Knox-had in many quarters attracted attention in the works and sermons of his disciple, Bishop Jebb, though it was not till the movement had taken shape that their full significance was realisedl. Knox had himself said, in 1816, that 'the Old High Church race is worn out'; and the excellent Thomas Sikes, rector of Guilsborough, set himself to teach a neglectful generation the doctrine of 'one Catholic and Apostolic Church.' ' He used to say,' says the biographer of his friend Joshua Watson, ' that wherever he went he saw many signs of earnest minds among the clergy of his time, and those who were then rising into public notice; but whether owing to the security of our civil establishment or a false charity to dissent, one great truth appeared by common agreement to have been suppressed. The Article itself involved ritual, discipline, orders, and sacred ordinances generally, and its exclusion tended to the subversion of all2.' And it was this teaching which it was the main work of the writers of Tracts jbr the Times to revive. 'We all concurred most heartily,' says one of them,'in the necessity of impressing on people that the Church was more than a merely human institution; that it had privileges, sacraments, a ministry, ordained by Christ; that it was a matter of the highest obligation to remain united to the Church.' The date at which the movement definitely began was the month of July 1833. On the 14th, John Keble, fellow of Oriel, professor of poetry, and curate to his father in a little village on the border of the Cotswolds, a man whose academic career had been one of most unusual distinction, preached before the judges of assize at Oxford a sermon on national apostasy, in which he denounced the liberal and Erastian tendencies of the age. He was a tory, no doubt: James Mozley notes how, as poetry professor, he gave a lecture 'proving Homer to be a tory (shall we say conservative?) and finally stating reasons why it was that all real poets were tories.' But the ideas of his sermon were far from political: they were an appeal to the nation on behalf of its very deepest religious needs. And the day on which it was preached was ever kept by Newman as the birthday of the new movement. A few days later, there met at the rectory of Hadleigh in Suffolk a company of like-minded men, under the presidency of the rector, Hugh James Rose, a Cambridge scholar, to whom the Oxonians looked for light and leading-'the one commanding

1 T'he Oxcford Mov~~Len tent, pp. 28, 29.

2 Churton's Life of Joshua Watson, i. 51.T. 7 T 7 7 I



xII] Richard Iurrell Proude 257 figure and very lovable man that the frightened and discomfited church people were now rallying round.' To him, five years later, Newman dedicated some sermons as to one 'who, when hearts were failing, bade us stir up the gift that was in us and betake ourselves to our true mother.' It may be well to give a brief sketch of the history of the movement thus opened before we consider the position of its leaders in English literature. A petition to the archbishop of Canterbury followed these first steps; and then began in September the issue of Tracts for the Times, 'on the privileges of the Church and against Popery and Dissent,' as a private memorandum of advertisement states. A word as to the prominent members of the party which brought out the tracts. John Keble not only had academic distinction, but was the writer of a book of sacred poems which had won an almost unparalleled success. The Chrisstian Year was published anonymously in 1827; but its authorship was no secret. John Henry Newman, also a fellow of Oriel, was vicar of St Mary's, the university, as well as a parish, church at Oxford. He had returned from a holiday, marred by illness, abroad, in the month of the assize sermon and the meeting at Hadleigh. With him had travelled his friend and brother-fellow, Richard Hurrell Froude, who had been Keble's pupil in the Cotswolds. Both felt, as Newman said later, that 'the true and primary author' of the movement was John Keble. Newman was coming to share many of his opinions; Froude was his ardent disciple. The wanderings in the Mediterranean, undertaken for Froude's health, had been a formative time in the life of Newman. He had left England when the church was threatened with disestablishment by the whig party. 'The bill for the suppression of the Irish sees was in progress,' he said; 'I had fierce thoughts against the liberals.' In the hour of battle, he turned to poetry, and he wrote, while he was away, more than half the poems of his lifel. At Rome, the two fiiends began Lyra Apostolica, poems contributed to The British Magazine, and collected in a single volume in 1836. The ring of battle is in the book. The Ark of God is in the field, Like clouds around, the alien armies sweep; Each by his spear, beneath his shield, In cold and dew the anointed warriors sleep. Oh dream no more of quiet life2! 1 About four-fifths, if we exclude The Dream of Gerontius. Ward, W., Life of Newman, I. 57. 2 Lyra Apostolica [ed. Beeching, H. C., undated], p. 77.

E. L. XII. CH. X II.

17258 The Oxford Movement [CH. The first of the tracts was Newman's own, Thoughts on the Ministerial Commission, respectfully addressed to the Clergy; and all the early tracts sounded the same notes of stress and danger and appeal. Other writers joined, some of them men of great power, and worthy to be leaders in a great cause; but perhaps in Newman and Froude alone was there the indubitable touch of real genius. Of Froude, those who knew him best said, when he had passed away, before the movement had reached more than its initial stages, that 'men with all their health and strength about them might gaze on his attenuated form, struck with a certain awe of wonderment at the brightness of his wit, the intenseness of his mental vision, and the iron strength of his argument.' His Remains (1838 and 1839) show the daring of his spirit, the directness, if narrowness, of his vision and the sympathy with which he appreciated the history of the church's past. His analysis and summary of the letters of Becket is remarkable for the time at which it was written and has not a few points of enduring value. In 1834, the tract writers were joined by Edward Bouverie Pusey, regius professor of Hebrew since 1828, a scholar of eminence who was already of great weight in the university and the church. Newman said of his accession to the movement that 'he was able to give a name, a fame, and a personality to what was without him a sort of mob.' Tract no. 18, Thoughts on the Benefits of the System of Fasting enjoined by our Church was issued with his initials. Isaac Williams, who was with him and Newman when it was agreed that he should contribute, says that the initials were added to show that he was in no way responsible for the other tracts; but the Record newspaper took them as showing his sanction, and the nickname 'Puseyite' was soon affixed to all the writers and their friends, and it stuck. The tracts were now well launched, and those who wrote them were a coherent body, with common aims and something of a common style in English writing: intensely serious, unaffected, without the slightest ornament or rhetoric, but dignified and, in later issues, reflecting in the language the weight and elaboration of the argument. John William Bowden, William Palmer, Arthur Philip Perceval, Isaac Williams were others who added each a distinctive character to the general impression; and the last of these was a genuine poet and the master of a singularly limpid and attractive prose style. In a few words, the history of the movement of which the tractsXII]

Newman at St Mary's

259

were the chief literary output may be told. A great impetus was given by the preaching of Newman at St Mary's, of which an immortal description exists by John Campbell Shairp, who became principal of the United college at St Andrews and professor of poetry at Oxford. The English church had produced many great preachers since the reformation. Men had hung on the words of Donne, had crowded to hear Stillingfleet and Tillotson; but no man had ever moved others so deeply by such simple means as Newman. All was quiet, restrained, subdued; the voice soft, almost monotonous, the eyes hardly ever lifted from the paper; but old truths were touched into life, when he spoke of 'Unreal Words,' of the 'Individuality of the Soul,' of the 'Invisible World,' and again of 'warfare the condition of victory,' 'the Cross of Christ the measure of the world,' or 'the Christian Church a home for the lonely.' The sermons gave to every cause which Newman supported a following of enthusiastic supporters. In 1836, the strength of the party was shown in the attack on Hampden when he was made regius professor of divinity. Efforts of Roman catholics in England under a new leader (Wiseman) were also met by Newman in lectures on Romanism and popular protestantism; in tract 71, he condemned the Roman form of various Christian doctrines; and the witness of the ancient church was collected in a series, begun in 1836 and lasting some forty years, of translations entitled Fathers of the Holy Catholic Church, anterior to the Division of East and West. Yet, other influences were already at work. An important addition to the company of friends proved eventually to be an impulse towards Rome. With Frederick Oakeley and Frederick Faber, came a man of much greater power, William George Ward, fellow of Balliol, a dialectician of extraordinary skill, an ebullient humourist and, as a friend, full of devotion and charm. But the book which had attracted him was the first severe blow the movement received. It was the first two volumes of Literary Remains of Richard Hurrell Froude (1838), and its unsparing condemnation of the reformers and the reformation alienated many supporters, alarmed those ignorant of history and turned the mass of the public into bitter opponents. Already, the school of liberalism in theology had attacked the tracts, Arnold using as violent language against 'the Oxford malignants' as was ever used against Wesley, and declaring that their work was to change sense into silliness and holiness into formality and hypocrisy. Still, recruits crowded to the banner of the tractarians. Newman succeeded to the editorship of the famous British Critic, 17-2260

The Oxford Movement

[CH.

a literary magazine whose importance dated from the days of the younger Pitt. It seemed as if the friends stood firmly in conservative ways. Behind them was the figure of that wonderful old scholar, theologian and tory, Martin Joseph Routh (1755 -1854), president of Magdalen, reserved, as Newman wrote in 1838, 'to report to a forgetful generation what was the theology of their fathers.' But, already the new accessions had cut into the original movement at an angle, fallen across its line of thought and then set about turning that line in its own direction. Tract 87, by Isaac Williams, On reserve in communicating religious knowledge, more by its title, probably-for all who did not read it, and some who did, entirely misunderstood it-than by its contents, alarmed many, and the author was easily defeated when he stood for the Oxford professorship of poetry. It was war now, and war within the field of English letters. Newman, in tract 90, repeated the argument of Sta. Clara in Charles I's time that the XXXIX Articles could not historically be directed against the council of Trent and were at least patient of an interpretation accordant with the theology of the catholic church. Such an argument was familiar enough and could only alarm the ignorant. But this it effectually did. The heads of houses awoke from torpor, and, except the patriarch president of Magdalen, and the rector of Exeter, under the influence of four college tutors (one of whom, Archibald Campbell Tait, of Balliol, lived to become archbishop of Canterbury), condemned the tract in March 1841. Bishops 'charged' against the author, and, at the same time, the English church seemed committed to an agreement with Prussian protestantism in the creation of a bishopric for Jerusalem. And then Newman himself received a serious blow to his own intellectual stability. The confidence of his studies in the history of the early church was abruptly broken by an article in The Dublin Review, September 1839, on the Donatists, written by Wiseman, the leader of the new and dominant party among the English Roman catholics. Other points in the story of ancient heresies seemed to him to look the same way. The 'palmary words' of St Augustine, securus judicat orbis terrarum, struck him in a new light. The bishops' condemnation weighed heavily on him, and he began to feel that he could not remain in a church which did not allow his sense of the Articles. Early in 1842, he left Oxford and went to live three miles away, but still in his parish, at Littlemore. He resigned his living in September 1843 and withdrew into lay communion. His last sermon, a lament of singular beauty for theXII]

Th e Secession of Newman

261

church of England, was preached at Littlemore, on 25 September 1843. Already, a sermon by Pusey, which a little knowledge of seventeenth century theology would have shown never to have travelled beyond the limits of the Caroline divines, had been condemned by the heads of houses, without a hearing or any statement of reasons. And, to add to the disasters which beset the tractarians, the irrepressible W. G. Ward published a heavy and exasperating book, The Ideal of a Christian Church. He gloried in the 'most joyful, most wonderful, most unexpected, sight! we find the whole cycle of Roman doctrine gradually possessing numbers of English churchmen.' On 13 February 1845, the movement reached its crisis at Oxford. Convocation, attended by more than a thousand members of the university, the most famous as well as the most obscure, condemned the book and deprived the author of his degrees. A proposal to censure tract 90 was defeated by the veto of the proctors. The scene, of passion and humour and snowballs, has often been described; and Edward Freeman, in later years the historian of the Norman conquest, set it to verse after the style of Macaulay's Virginia. It was, as R. W. Church, then junior proctor, wrote in after years, 'not only the final defeat and conclusion of the first stage of the movement. It was the birthday of the modern Liberalism of Oxford.' On 9 October, Newman was received into the church of Rome. From that moment, the story ceases to be picturesque or passionate. Those in whom the original principles of the Oxford leaders had been firmly rooted, Keble and Pusey, Isaac Williams and Charles Marriott, Richard Church and James Mozley, remained to teach to the next generation the doctrines for which they had suffered. The movement took its place in the history of the English church. It passed away from Oxford. Part of its influence went Romewards with Newman. Part remained, with the two stalwarts among its first leaders, to leaven the life of the whole church of England. Keble died in 1866, having written nothing which achieved the popularity of The Christian Year; but, till the last there remained much of the grace and sober sweetness of his early manner in all that he wrote. Pusey lived till 16 September 1882, when he had survived all his first associates, except Newman, and most of their first disciples. Year by year, he produced books of massive learning and unbending orthodoxy. Lord chancellor Selborne said of him that 'he was a power in the Church of England greater than Archbishop or Bishop for more than half262 7he Oxford Movement [CH. a century.' Theological literature which issued from the press under his name as author or editor or with his imprimnatur found a ready market. So long as he lived there was still something of a theological public, as there had been in the days of the Caroline divines. And, in the Roman obedience, and created a cardinal in 1879, Newman lingered on till 1890, having almost ceased to write. When he died, the literary influence he had represented was at its last gasp. It is difficult, while the controversies in which the Oxford writers were protagonists are still scarce cold, to estimate the position which the movement will occupy in English literature. In manner, expression, tone, the twentieth century presents a piquant contrast to the severity of sixty years ago. If theologians still think seriously, they are wont to write flippantly. To the tractarians, the manner reflected the solemnity of the matter with which they were concerned. Pusey, whose learning and stability far surpassed that of any of his contemporaries in the arena, cared nothing for grace of expression, achieved lucidity not without an effort, but was the heir of the dignity of the ancient divines. He was a master of serried argument, repeating his blows as with a hammer, cogent, cumulative, compelling, if not convincing, to assent, rarely epigrammatic, never concise. He was mainly a preacher, a commentator, a minister to individual souls, surpassingly sincere, profoundly erudite, piercingly appellant. Nor was the range of his survey limited. He could pass easily from Semitic scholarship to constitutional history, from French pietism to social reforms: on each subject, he was an expert. His style, like his mind, was eminently traditional and conservative. He denounced the doctrine that the original of government was with the people, and 'the so-called social compact,' with as much determination as he defended the symbol of Chalcedon or the rights and claims of the poor. And the language in which he expressed all this was the language of an Elizabethan without its elasticity or a Caroline without its quaintness. He was no pedant for pure English, still less for the vocabulary of a pedagogue reared upon the classical tongues. There seems no art in his sentences, and yet it is not true that there is none. But, what art there is is only that of taking pains-not, like Newman, to say a thing in the best as well as the clearest way in which it can be said, but only to say it so that it is certain to be understood. So, he is found sometimes writing sentences as short and trenchant as Macaulay's; yet, far more often, you will come across one in which, without hesitation,XII]

Pusey as a Writer

263

he has extended his meaning to nearly four hundred words. His style, eminently, was one that had its best effect when read aloud. Often a phrase is pungent and arresting: rarely does a sentence linger in the memory. But the power and weight that belong to his greatest efforts is indubitable. For sheer solemnity, pathos and grandeur, there was nothing in the century in which he lived that surpassed the two sermons preached, the one in 1843, before, and the cause of, his suspension, and the other in 1846, on the resumption of 'this my office among you,' of which he had been deprived. The sentences at the beginning of the second are characteristic: It will be in the memory of some that when, nearly three years past, Almighty God (for 'secret faults' which He knoweth, and from which, I trust, He willed thereby the rather to 'cleanse' me), allowed me to be deprived for a time of this my office among you, I was endeavouring to mitigate the stern doctrine of the heavy character of a Christian's sins, by pointing out the mercies of God which might reassure the penitent, the means of his restoration, the earnests of his pardon. And in so doing, it seemed best, first to dwell upon the unfathomable mercies of God in Christ, the exhaustless abyss of mercy in the Infinite Fountain of Mercy;-when it is not finally shut out, Infinite as Himself, as being poured out from His Infinity; and then, more directly, on all those untold and ineffable mercies contained in the intercession of our Lord, at the Right Hand of God, for us. For so, I hoped, would the hearts of penitents be the more fixed upon Him, the Source of all mercies, and their faith be strengthened, and they the more hope that no depth of past sin could utterly sever them from the love of Christ; nay, could sever them from no degree of fulness of His unspeakable love1. Primarily, what he wrote bears the impress of his deep devotion. Whether he wrote about religion or not, what he wrote was religious. But, secondarily, all his writings bore the mark of his indomitable and tenacious spirit. And all that he wrote was balanced, proportionate, sensitive to distinctions, receptive of truths new and old. The very character of all the tractarians was sincerity, and most conspicuously of all did this belong to Pusey. When others left their old moorings he remained firmly anchored to the past of the church. He foresaw the dark future, but he stayed himself on the things of old. When others looked only on England, his view extended beyond, to the country whence he espied a coming danger. He foresaw that what he had seen in Germany would come to his own land. 'This will all come upon us in England, and how utterly unprepared we are ' But then, as he said, he was in the English church by the providence of God; and there he found all that he needed, though not all, perhaps, that he could desire. And thus, to him, the Oxford movement was only 1 Entire Absolution of the Penitent: A Sermon, 1846, pp. 1, 2.264 The Oxford Movement [cH. a call upon the succours of the past. As he wrote more than forty years after the first tractWhen ww were awakened, the Revival was wholly from within. We did not open a Roman book. We did not think of them. Rome was quiet at that time in itself. It was only, for political ends, assimilating itself as much as it could to us. 'We must own,' Cardinal Wiseman said, 'that we have been a little ashamed of our special doctrines.' However, we had all which we wanted within our Church. We had the whole range of Christian doctrine, and did not look beyond, except to the Fathers, to whom our Church sent us. One, of whom I thought far more than myself, said, 'We have range enough in those before us, to whatever the pigmies may growl.' It was Keble, no doubt, whom Pusey thus quoted. And Keble, like Pusey, and far more than Newman, had his roots in the past. If Pusey's name was given to the followers of the movement, it was, unquestionably, Keble who gave it its first popularity. His sermon inaugurated it, and its principles were those of The Christian Year. That book, said Newman once, laughingly, was the fons et origo mali. And in it we see the nature of the influence which the movement exercised, not only upon theology, but upon literature. Here, again, is the note of sincerity, first and foremost: sincerity which means purity, also, and The princely heart of innocence. But sincerity, with Keble, does not mean narrowness. Dean Stanley said of The Christian Year that it had 'a real openness of mind for the whole large view of the Church and the world.' It could hardly be otherwise with the work of a writer who was steeped in the ancient classic literatures and had a deep sympathy with nature as well as human life. And the result is a poetic vision of the sacredness of life, in town and country, in art and labour, in literature as well as prayer. Nature, to the poet, is a sacrament of God. And its appeal has no need to be heightened beyond what the poet feels himself: the mark of his art is its veracity. He writes exactly as he thinks. But he thinks in the manner of the early nineteenth century, and the manner sometimes prevents the thought from reaching in clear directness the generations of later time. A simple thought is not always expressed in simple style. Keble's poetry is eminently literary and reminiscent: it is the work of a well-read-almost a too well-read-man. And the memory now and again goes near to quench the inspiration. The Christian Year is, eminently, a book of its own period, as that period was seen by one who, most of all, was a scholar and a saint. And Keble was, 1 Pusey's Spiritual Letters, p. 239.XII]

Isaac J/hilliams

265

besides, a preacher and a critic. If his sermons cannot be placed in that rank which Newman alone of the nineteenth century preachers can claim to have reached, they have, at least, one conspicuous merit-at least in his later volumes-their absolute directness and simplicity. He spoke, first and foremost, so as to be understood by everyone, and yet from such a height of personal experience that, as one said who heard him, you seemed to be amidst the rustling of angels' wings. The preaching of the tractarians, like that of the Caroline divines, was eminently doctrinal, yet it did not abandon the direct morality of the eighteenth century; it rather raised it, by the conjunction, to a higher power. As a critic, Keble has sympathy and depth, dictated by the central thoughts which ruled his life. Poetry, in its essence, was, to him, simply religion; and the best poets in every age and every country had been those who have had the highest thoughts about God. It may be that the lectures he delivered, written, as they were, in the choice Latin of which he was a master, will never be read again; but there were thoughts in them which have passed into the common stock of criticism; and dean Church declared that they were 'the most original and memorable course ever delivered from the Chair of Poetry in Oxford.' The influence which Keble exercised upon others is illustrated most conspicuously in the life of Isaac Williams, who came to Trinity as a bright Welsh lad interested in his books and his play, but hardly at all in religion. Latin verse brought him to the notice of the poetry professor, and he became his pupil in the lovely village between Thames and Cotswold, where 'the most distinguished academic of his day' ministered to a few country folk with as much zeal as others would bestow on labours the most anxious and exciting. He came into a new world of intense reality and, no less, of engrossing charm. He saw-again to quote the historian of the movementthis man, who had made what the world would call so great a sacrifice, apparently unconscious that he had made any sacrifice at all, gay, unceremonious, bright, full of play as a boy, ready with his pupils for any exertion, mental or muscular-for a hard ride, or a crabbed bit of Aeschylus, or a logic fence with disputatious and paradoxical undergraduates, giving and taking on even ground1. And Keble made a man of him. Isaac Williams was a true poet, who, it may be, has not yet come into his own. The fire of the Celt burst forth in many a lament for the past, and prayer for the 1 Church, R. W., The Oxford Movement, p. 60.266

Rhe Oxford Movement

[CH.

future, of the church, which it became his passion, in utter selfeffacement, to serve. The Cathedral (1838) contains verse, inspired, no doubt, in form by Scott and, sometimes, by Wordsworth, which has not a little of the romance and enthusiasm of the Wizard of the North. The ancient church of Wales, the church which he came to serve in England, the church which was that of Basil and Ambrose, Gregory and Clement, Cyprian and Chrysostom, was, to him, the centre of life: and he was content to abide with it in unostentatious work, doing each day's duty without recognition or reward. That is the note of his poetry and his prose: it lights the fire of the one, it dictates the grey sedateness of the other. When he compared English uses with 'the richer dress her southern sisters own,' he was content with what might seem 'the homelier truth.' He turned back from the breviary to the prayer book: The chorister That sings the summer nights, so soft and strong, To music modulating his sweet throat, Labours with richness of his varied note, Yet lifts not unto Heaven a holier song, Than our home bird that, on some leafless thorn, Hymns his plain chaunt each wintry eve and morn1. His poetry knows little of the technical mastery which belonged to that of Keble, but, in genuine feeling, it was surpassed by none of his contemporaries. And it is this which makes his Autobiography, next to Newman's Apologia, the most fascinating record of the time which any of the leaders bequeathed to posterity. In it, every phase of the movement as it appealed to one of the chief disciples is recorded without a touch of exaggeration, with no arriere-pensde, no attempt to justify, still less to conceal, any of his thoughts, or aims, or experiences. It explains the attractiveness of Newman, the devotion of his followers, the sincerity of their principles, the tragedy of their separation. If it has not the art or the pathos of Newman's Apologia, it is a picture even more truthful, though but a picture in little, of the days of storm and stress in which the movement was shaped which transformed the English church into a new and living influence on men. When Williams became Newman's curate at St Mary's, he was struck by the contrast to the school in which the Kebles had trained him. He found Newman 'in the habit of looking for effect, and for what was sensibly effective.' This, which is true, without any hint of censure, of Newman's work as a religious teacher, left its impress on all that he wrote. With all the genius of the poet and the preacher, with all the severity and 1 The Cathedral, 1841 edn, p. 21.xII]

Apologia Pro Vita Sua

267

simplicity of the Oxford school which he led, Newman was yet, to the fingertips, and to the end of his life, an artist, and an incomparable master of his art. Hardly yet can his literary be severed from his personal and religious influence; but already two, at least, of his works have come to be ranked among the classics. His Apologia pro vita sua was written in 1864 in answer to an offensive and unprovoked slander from Charles Kingsley. An accusation that truth for its own sake had never been a virtue with the Roman catholic clergy was supplemented by a gratuitous mention of Newman, and, for this, the only substantiation offered was a reference to a sermon delivered when the preacher was still ministering in the English church. Newman showed that the sermon contained no words that could possibly express such a meaning. Kingsley, the most honest and fearless of men, yet would not make an honest withdrawal, and Newman, with just relentlessness, exposed him to the derision of the world. The exposure was completed by an intimate account of the mental history of the man who had been maligned. Between April and June, Newman put out an Apologia, in seven parts, which should vindicate himself and show his countrymen what manner of man he was. 'False ideas may be refuted by argument, but by true ideas alone are they expelled. I will vanquish,' he said, 'not my accuser, but my judges.' And this he did in a wonderful way. He sat down and wrote day and night-his fingers, as he said, walking nearly twenty miles a day just as he felt, thought and remembered, often weeping as he wrote, but triumphantly achieving such a record as few men have ever made, so sincere, so thorough, or so convincing. From the day when his Apologia was published, Newman won a place in the heart of his countrymen of whatever religion or whatever politics, which he never lost till he passed away nearly fifty years later in an honoured old age. The supreme merit of his Apologia, no doubt, is its directness. Every page seems as if it were rather spoken than written. It has the merits of a letter rather than of a book. It seems to represent without omission or concealment the whole mind of the writer. And yet it is a piece of finished art, not conscious but inevitable, because the writer had become, half-perhaps altogether-unwittingly, a supreme artist. He could not write in any other way than as an artist: his art had become to him a second nature. Thus, then, when the English of his Apologia is recommended as a model, and as characteristic of its age and the tractarian movement, it must be remembered that its simplicity is largely the result of a268

The Oxford Movement

[CH.

long and strenuous mental discipline acting upon a singularly brilliant and sensitive spirit. Newman writes as nature looks; but it is not given to others, in untaught simplicity, to write as he wrote. The training ground of his Apologia was the long series of sermons, delivered week by week, saint's day by saint's day, at St Mary's, Oxford. Their simplicity seems even more certain than that of the personal vindication which followed them after twenty years. Their English is simple, clear and refreshing as pure water; answering to every changing thought of the speaker's mind. The thought is as limpid as the language. There had been nothing like them in the English pulpit: the nearest approach was bishop Wilson, yet in him still lingered the savour of the old divines who, undoubtedly, said what they meant, yet relished it as it was said. Newman never seems to taste what he is saying, nor to write with any look backward at himself: he only speaks straight home. Yet all this would have been impossible, his unique and wonderful style would not have been created, if he had not been both a student and a musician and had not, almost all his life long written thrice over everything that he intended to preserve. The ancient classics, the fathers in their solemn searching severity, the unearthly music of the violin-these taught him the mastery of language and to know when he had mastered it to express every vibration of his thought. Of his teachers in English literature, only two were prominent, Southey, whom he 'worshipped,' and Crabbe, from whom he unconsciously learnt more than any other master, in power to register, remember and reproduce a single impression in single-minded words. And, ever at the background, a spirit which dominates but finds no complete expression which frail humanity can grasp, is the majestic infinity which sounds in the symphonies of Beethoven. In his later sermons, especially in Sermons for Mixed Congregations (1850), his style was much more ornate, his eloquence less restrained, with an extraordinary vividness of description and appeal. He became more rhetorical, more obviously aiming at effect, with less of English reticence and with a vehemence more Italian or French. Next to Newman's Sermons and his Apologia, no doubt The Dream of Gerontius, the vision, half dream, half inspiration, of the beginnings of a world beyond this life, is his most direct appeal. Swinburne recognised 'the force, the fervour, the terse energy' in its verse: and it has that mark of genius, like the finest parts of Shakespeare, that poor and rich, learned andXII]

Newman's Later tForks

269

ignorant, are alike carried away by its attraction. There are immortal lines in it, and it is no temerity to predict that 'Praise to the Holiest,' like 'Lead kindly Light,' will never be forgotten, the one a profound theology in words like classic marble, the other a passionate cry of individual struggle and self-conquest. In the rest of Newman's work there is an obvious division drawn by his submission to the see of Rome. Yet there is little apparent difference in his manner of writing. He never surpassed, in the way of pure exposition, the clarity and distinction of his style in Lectures on the Prophetical Office of the Church (1838). But, later books were, at least at the time of their publication, more generally influential, notably The Scope and Nature of University Education (1859), The Grammar of Assent (1870) and perhaps, also, the earlier Essay on the Development of Christian Doctrine (1845). This last, begun while he was still in the English church, became a justification of his secession. It explained how modern Rome, widely different from the church of the Fathers, could yet claim to represent the original Christianity, not as identical but as consistent with it, as being in fact the full fruit of which the seed only was seen at first. In his theory, Newman was not so far away from the Darwinism which was to exert a far greater influence on English thought, and he certainly expressed the heart of the science of comparative religion. Something of the same kind may be said of lectures on University Education. They represent, if they do not indeed anticipate, some of the most powerful ideas of the later nineteenth century in regard to the true functions of a university and the motive force of university reform. Knowledge for its own sake, as enlargement of the mind, is the object of a university education; but such knowledge is impossible apart from a theology. All knowledge is, ultimately, a defence of the Christian faith. A university is, must be, impartial; but it can only be impartial if it includes theology in the sciences which it studies. The Grammar of Assent carried the argument of probability, the corner-stone of his master Butler, on to new ground. The argument was, to him, 'an accumulation of probabilities,' and he reached these by a study of the mental processes which lead to apprehension and assent. 'In any enquiry about things in the concrete,' he wrote, 'men differ from each other not so much in the soundness of their reasoning as in the principles which govern its exercise,' and those principles were not general but personal. 'The validity of proof is determined not by any scientific test but by the illative sense.' It is easy to relate such thoughts as these to much270

7Te Oxford Movement

[CH.

later philosophy, both English and German. And, in fact, what is characteristic of all Newman's writing is that form of genius which seizes upon the floating tendencies of nascent thought and points the way towards unforeseen conclusions. It is only within very narrow limits that Newman's thought here or elsewhere can ever be called reactionary. No doubt he, as one of the latest and clearest of his critics and admirers has said, had, indeed, an 'abhorrence of doctrinal liberalism.' In 1835, he vigorously protested against 'the introduction of rationalistic principles into revealed religion' in a tract which described rationalism as 'a certain abuse of reason; that is, a use of it for purposes for which it never was intended and is unfitted,' and 'a rationalistic spirit' as 'the antagonist of Faith; for Faith is, in its very nature, the acceptance of what our reason cannot reach, simply and absolutely upon testimony.' But it has of recent years again and again been asserted that he was the intellectual parent of a modernism which he would have abhorred. A partial study of his writings might give some ground for such a view: a complete one refutes it. It could, indeed, hardly be held by any who did not, perhaps unconsciously, identify the wider catholicism of orthodox Christianity with the narrower presentment of it in modern Roman theology which Newman never set himself very seriously to defend. His intellectual standpoint, however much during his long life it may seem to have varied, never really departed from the three bases on which it had been founded. He was an Aristotelian. He distrusted much of modern metaphysic. He regarded the actual facts of human life as the ultimate basis of reason. He was, like many of the most earnest English thinkers of his time, a convinced disciple of Butler. His reading of The Analogy of Religion was, as he said, an era in his religious opinions. Starting from probability as the guide of life, he never fancied that the limitless area of things human and divine could be fully mapped or the ultimate mystery more than 'imperfectly comprehended.' But he found reality in the religious facts of the world, as the philosophers of his time found them in the moral facts, and the men of science in the physical; and, herein, he may be said to have anticipated modern psychology. Yet also, and with at least as much strength, he was a historian: very often, not an accurate historian in detail, but a historian of illumination and genius. If much that he wrote as history has long been cast aside, the interpretation that he gave of early-not the earliestChristian centuries remained as an inspiration to the students whoXII]

Dean Church

271

made Oxford history famous, to Stubbs and Freeman, Creighton and Bryce, and remains still. When he wrote his different studies he was loyal to his principles, whether, at the time, he was an English or a Roman churchman, but he never surrendered the scholar's independence. No doubt, he loved narration more than interpretation, character more than institutional life; but, what he wanted to find, and believed he could find, in history was truth: and in that he never deserted the fundamental principle of the tractarian company. As a historian, his affinities were with the French school which was coming into existence in his middle age, never with the purely German, where vast collections of facts were often used to support an unverifiable theory. But, if his passion throughout was catholicism, his preconception was truth. Newman must ever remain the central figure in the literature of the movement of which he was the most conspicuous figure. But Pusey, it would be true to say, represented far more entirely its most prominent characteristics: its basis in history and tradition, its via media, its determination stare super antiquas vias. And it may well be that, if Newman appealed to the wider circle, Pusey and Keble influenced more directly the general literature of English religion. The Oxford movement certainly belongs to the history of English religion more definitely than to the history of English literature; but it had great influence, outside its own definite members, on the literary taste of its age. It spoke from the first for a certain purity, directness and severity of style: later, the historical influences which attached themselves to it, through the study of ancient legends, and liturgies, and hymns, produced a richer vein of prose, a more florid touch in poetry. No one can think that Tennyson was wholly unmoved by its manner; but Dolben and Pater were the undoubted issue of its later life. If one were to look for men of letters who were as clearly such, and would have been in any age, as they were men of religion, one would light instantly on the names of Richard William Church and Richard Chenevix Trench. The former, a fellow of Oriel with Newman, one of the proctors who vetoed the new test proposed when Ward was condemned, died as dean of St Paul's. Church lived to be the historian of the movement itself, and perhaps that was his finest work. But his deep thought and profound wisdom, which had remarkable weight with the eminent statesmen of his day, were seen at their best in his interpretation of past history as well as in lectures and sermons which are models of clear writing and272

The Oxford Movement

[CH.

clear thought. Something of the severity and unworldliness of Dante, of whom he was a devoted student, seemed to have descended upon him, with, also, the great Florentine's knowledge of the ways and thoughts of common men. But, most clearly, he was, in literature, the disciple of Newman, in the simplicity, directness and absence of ornament which made his style powerful in its effect on the writing of his generation. Church was a preacher, a moralist, a historian; but, especially, he was a student of human nature, who judged men equally yet with sympathy, who weighed motives in scales which were never deflected by prejudice or passion, and knew to a nicety the springs of human action. He was a master of sympathetic literary criticism, too, as his volume on Spenser proves. His historical sketches, such as that of the early middle age, and his criticisms in literature, such as those of Cassiodorus and Pascal, show a characteristic simplicity which cannot veil the abundance of knowledge. Occasionally, something is revealed of the fire within him, which breaks out now and again in his classic memorial of the Oxford movement and the men who began and led it, a record, as he wrote to Lord Acton, that one who lived with them, and lived long beyond most of them, believed in the reality of their goodness and height of character, and still looks back with deepest reverence to those forgotten men as the companions to whose teaching and example he owes an infinite debt, and not he only but religious society in England of all kinds1. Preeminently, Church was a man of letters; and this was as obviously true of Richard Chenevix Trench. Church noted 'the peculiar combination in him of the poet, the theologian and the champion of primitive and catholic doctrine.' Some of his lyrics belong to the highest flight of English poetry. His religious writings had a peculiar distinction and charm. Just as Church owed inspiration to Greece, modern as well as ancient, and its struggle for liberty, so Trench had nourished himself on the great literature of Spain and was in harmony with the aspirations of her liberal revival. He passed, in 1863, from the deanery of Westminster to the archbishopric of Dublin, where he was primate at the disestablishment and fought hard for the ancient symbols of the Irish church under its new constitution. Like the dean of St Paul's, he was not a militant tractarian, but he spoke of Hugh James Rose as 'my master,' and wrote, on the death of Pusey, that 'a prince in our Israel has indeed passed away.' The names 1 Quoted in the 'Advertisement' to The Oxford Movement, p. vi.XII]

Neale and the Mozleys

273

of Church and Trench, which, even apart from their theological writings, and at any time in our history, would have been prominent in English letters, are examples of the influence which the serious ideas of the Oxford movement exercised upon literature. In historical study, the influence was no less conspicuous. William Stubbs, the greatest English historian of the nineteenth century, was a convinced tractarian and spoke of Pusey, whom he assisted in literary work, as 'the master.' Henry Parry Liddon, the greatest preacher of the period, whose sermons at St Paul's were, for twenty years, a conspicuous factor in the life of London, was the disciple, the friend and the biographer of Pusey. His Bampton lectures on the Divinity of Christ were worthy to rank with the great dogmatic treatises of the older divines. And their successors remain to the present day. Not far apart from them, yet still somewhat in isolation, was the striking figure of John Mason Neale, not an Oxford but a Cambridge man. He was antiquary, historian, poet, novelist, priest; and in none of these activities can he be forgotten. He was as facile as he was learned. He poured forth book after book of amazing erudition on almost every conceivable subject of theological and historical interest. As a translator of Latin and Greek hymns no Englishman has surpassed him. But, above all things, he loved 'a story' and he could tell it-as such an historical novel as Theodora Phranza, which tells the fall of Christian Constantinople, evidences-with the best of them. While his knowledge was diffused, that of James Bowling Mozley was intense and concentrated. Master of a stern and somewhat arid style, which still could rise into eloquence and passion, he exercised a profound influence on the generation which succeeded him. He was the foe of shallow thinking and shallow writing. Many of the idols of the market-place, past or present, from Martin Luther to Thomas Carlyle, suffered his swashing blows. His brother Thomas had abilities of a more popular cast: he was, for a while, editor of The British Critic: for many years he was a leader writer for The Times, and he represented that paper at Rome during the time of the council 1869-70, when his letters, unsympathetic though Roman catholics have complained that they are, presented a most vivid and remarkable picture of a great historical episode. In his old age, he wrote Reminiscences of the days of struggle, which are entertaining, but not always accurate. 'If a story cannot stand on two legs,' said Newman, whose sister he had married, 'Tom E. L. XII. CH. XII. 18274

7lhe Oxford Movement

[CH.

supplies a third.' From him comes a touching tribute to the self-effacing labours of Charles Marriott, like himself a fellow of Oriel, who was the helper of every one, great and small, who belonged to the movement, and its great stay in scholarship, as editing with Keble and Pusey The Oxford Library of the Fathers. Outside Oxford, the same interests which had awakened the ecclesiastical learning and catholic orthodoxy of the university were represented in many writers who were affected, in greater or less degree, by the principles of the tractarians. Walter Farquhar Hook was one of the most masterful figures of his time, first as vicar of Leeds for twenty-two years and then as dean of Chichester. He accepted nearly all the principles of the tractarians, but frequently stood apart from their expression and was often a vehement critic. He was an industrious compiler of dictionaries and biographies, without sufficient research or originality to give them permanent vitality. His successor at Chichester, John William Burgon, held a similar position of independent judgment. He was a keen and biting controversialist and the most conservative of biblical critics; but he had an intense love of 'good men,' among whom he placed some of the authors of the tracts. His biographies are essential to a knowledge of the movement. Two sons of the famous statesman and philanthropist, and brothers of that bishop of Oxford who revolutionised the ideal of English episcopacy, Robert Isaac and Henry William Wilberforce, both at Oriel, passed into the Roman church. The elder had been an archdeacon and yet had written theological books of real value, notably one on The Doctrine of The Incarnation, which was on strictly tractarian lines and won great fame. The younger after his secession gave important help to the Roman catholic cause in the press. Some of those who had abandoned their orders and left the English church seemed eager to disclaim any connection with it. Some vehemently attacked what they had before as vehemently defended, but no one of them save Newman made any great mark in literature. Some were content with a change of clothes, substituting for their customary suits of solemn black the vagaries of 'blue ties and ginger-coloured trousers.' More formidable was the Anglo-Roman hierarchy created in 1850, whose head announced its creation by a letter 'from out the Flaminian Gate.' Nicholas Wiseman, Roman catholic controversialist andXII]

Converts to Rome

275

cardinal, whose education had not been English, was a capable craftsman in letters. He was an orientalist, and a cultured student of many subjects, who became the first archbishop of Westminster in 1850, after devoting himself to confuting 'High Church Claims' (1841), and embodying his theories of church history in a pretty story called Fabiola, or the Church of the Vatacombs (1854). Henry Edward, cardinal Manning, who had been an English archdeacon and became Wiseman's successor, wrote, while he was a member of the English church, volumes of sermons which reached at least a fifth edition, and, as a controversial papalist, many vehement criticisms of the Anglican position; but, though his personal influence was great, his work is negligible as literature. John Hungerford Pollen, as an English priest wrote the most touching and tragic of all the records of struggle in parish work for tractarian principles (A Narrative of Five Years at St Saviour's, Leeds, 1851), and then, as a Romanist layman, devoted himself to art, wrote some valuable lectures, was the friend of Morris and Rossetti, Swinburne and Patmore, and became in artistic literature, what his friend Baron von Hiigel said he was in life, 'the perfect type of l'homme du monde.' Another convert, Frederick William Faber, endowed with high gifts of imagination, deplored, as a Roman catholic, the position of the Magi, with, perhaps, an undercurrent of reference to the protestants' unhappy lotNo Pope, no blessed Pope had they To guide them with his hand,and was generally sentimental and sugary, very unlike the tractarians; but he wrote some devotional poetry of sincerity and pathos. John Dobree Dalgairns was capable and solid as a Roman controversialist on behalf of Christian belief; but he was far surpassed by another of the later disciples of the tractarians who became a power in the church of his adoption. William George Ward, the crisis of whose stormy career was critical also in the movement itself, has won immortality in the verse of Tennyson and the prose of dean Church. The latter finds it his chief distinction that as 'a profound metaphysical thinker he was the equal antagonist on their own ground of John Stuart Mill and Herbert Spencer.' His work hardly belongs to pure literature: its manner and method are, for the most part, cumbrous, only occasionally vivid or comprehensive. His own generation read what he wrote because he was famous for what he said: it was meat and drink to him to argue and to chop logic, 18-2276 The Oxford Movement [CH. and his swordplay was a delight to the onlookers. But, if his Ideal, his intuitionist philosophy and his controversial treatises are forgotten, he will ever be remembered by the poet's farewell to him as one Whose Faith and Work were bells of full accord, My friend, the most unworldly of mankind, Most generous of all Ultramontanes, Ward. Ambrose Phillips de Lisle, another English convert to the Roman obedience, followed the Tracts for the Times with keenest interest from the first. He had been ten years a Roman catholic when they began to appear and he set himself before long to correspond with their writers in the hope of 'producing a good understanding between the Catholic and Anglican churches, with a view to the ultimate restoration of that happy and blessed unity, which formerly existed between them for more than a thousand years, and which,' he added, 'I am perfectly certain will one day be restored.' The letters which passed between him and Montalembert illustrate how close at some points was the connection between the ecclesiastical revival in England and in France. The French man of letters had no hope that Catholicity will make any real progress in England, as long as the fanatical spirit of Archbishop Manning, Mr Ward, and others of the same stamp is prevalent among English Catholics1; and, on the other side, Newman was equally hopeless about reunion or 'the conversion of that corporate body which we call the Anglican Church.' De Lisle's own work, sympathetic in aim, trivial in result, is an example of the rift between the two bodies, in literature as well as in religion. Only in Newman himself was the influence of the Oxford movement to be discerned among Romanist writers. But the glamour of tractarian theology extended far beyond those who were its first teachers or their direct heirs. It created a religious literature effective if ephemeral: it 'tuned the pulpits' for some half a century to a gravity which strove, often successfully, after the majesty of classical sculpture. And, in the poetry of Digby Mackworth Dolben, only recently given to the world, and of Christina Rossetti, it formed a new life exuberant and aflame. Dolben pursued its teaching till it yielded to him a certain medieval richness of ecclesiastical imagery that touched at many points a religious passion which was older than Christianity, and almost

1 Purcell, E., Life of Ambrose Phillips de Lisle, vol. iI, p. 360.XII]

Tractarian Novels

277

hostile to it. To Christina Rossetti, the catholic theology of the English church was the very breath of life, and she accepted its sternness without dispute. Yet, while the accent of severity clings to all she wrote, we are, in her company, on the road to a reaction which yet has its roots in the past: the splendour of Jeremy Taylor is not forgotten and the exotic richness of Walter Pater is in sight. In humbler literature, 'tractarianism' may be thought to have created an epoch by inaugurating the dreary succession of religious novels. But they were not dreary in their beginnings. J. M. Neale was a great writer of romance. Newman himself put some very good polemical work into Loss and Gain (with an immortal description of an Oxford tutor's breakfast) and Callista. Wiseman's Fabiola was an effort of the same kind. Francis Edward Paget, student of Christ Church and then rector of Elford, published a series of most interesting tales, containing quite delicious descriptions of country life and character which no novelist of his time surpassed. But most prominent of all was the long line of stories, exquisite in domestic portraiture, strong in moral power, keen in understanding of character and touched with a gracious humour, which issued from the parish of Hursley-where Keble was to the authoress a true guide, philosopher and friend-and were the work of Charlotte M. Yonge. The Heir of Redclyffe and The Little Duke have their place in English literature. They have had many imitators and successors but few rivals, unless John Inglesant may claim to be of their company. A movement which had so many means of making itself felt throughout the country had, naturally, an influence in many phases of literature. It was primarily religious, with a religion, said one of its lay disciples, an eminent public official, 'which was fervent and reforming in essentials with a due reverence for existing authorities and habits and traditions'; but it was not narrow or cloistered, it was 'a religion which did not reject, but aspired to embody in itself, any form of art and literature, poetry, philosophy, and even science which could be pressed into the service of Christianity1.' But its permanent effects may be seen most clearly in the fields of history and dogma. During the eighteenth century, the constant study of the Fathers of the early church which had been the basis of the theological writings of the reformers and the Caroline 1 Letters of Lord Blachford, p. 15.278

The Oxford Movement

[CH. XII

divines had passed into desuetude. In the seventeenth century, no one would have dared to write theology without quoting long passages of crabbed Latin and obscure Greek. In the eighteenth century, the habit had gone entirely out of fashion, and Wesley, scholar though he was, was the last man in the world to wish for its revival. But, while the tractarians were in their cradles, Routh of Magdalen had recalled to the church of England the thought of the rock whence it was digged, by the publication of the first part of his Reliquiae Sacrae (1814), in which he collected the fragments of early Christian writings up to the first Nicene council and edited them with a remarkable combination of affection, erudition and sagacity. He set the tone for the Oxford writers. Theology and history were inseparable. Accuracy was all important. 'Verify your quotations' was the first duty of a scholar. The real teaching of Christianity would be found, in balanced emphasis, if you went back far enough for it. And that was the motto of the tractarians. Christian dogma was inseparable from true history. That was a far-reaching principle, fruitful long after the tractarians had ceased to work.CHAPTER XIII

THE GROWTH OF LIBERAL THEOLOGY RELIGIOUS thought has seldom been so stagnant in England as at the opening of the nineteenth century. The professional advocates of the Christian faith did not lack ability, but they had been traversing the same arid ground of external evidences for half a century. They continued to put the apostles into the witness box and acquit them according to the rules of the Old Bailey. They cross-examined the saints for their attestation of miracle and prophecy, but omitted to discover the secret of their life. A Paley or a Watson might display admirable commonsense, and be accounted by the faithful a match for Tom Paine; and yet the religious life remained starved. The methodist movement, with its evangelical counterpart, had, indeed, given back to religious feeling its rightful place and more, but had produced little or no theology, except for the particularly acrid and unprofitable Calvinist controversy. The French revolution had set up a ferment of new ideas and induced a critical attitude towards all established notions and institutions. But the very extravagances of the movement, and the desperate nature of the war in which England was engaged against the propagandists of the revolution, made English people more than usually suspicious of new ideas, and gave a new lease of life to threatened institutions like the established church. Sympathy with the ideas of the revolution was regarded as dubiously patriotic and probably irreligious, as Priestley and William Frend found to their cost. When the former took flight to a more kindly clime, bishop Horsley could exult and sing, 'The orators and oracles of Birmingham and Essex Street are dumb.' Traditional teaching, therefore, remained in almost undisputed possession through the period of the great war, and beyond it, when the new fears of social unrest excited corresponding fears280 Ahe Growth of Liberal lieology

[CH.

for Christian faith. For the first twenty years of the new century, English theology was at a standstill. The stars of the older day, Paley and Horsley and Watson, were setting, and no new stars had arisen. Theology could make no serious progress until it should emancipate itself from the outworn conventions of the previous century, and be free to face the urgent questions of the new age. The fashionable utilitarianism of Paley could kindle no warmth. Idealism already had its prophets in Germany; but it needed a Coleridge to discover and interpret them for English readers. There were also on the continent pioneers of a more scientific literary criticism; but their work was still unknown in this country. Herbert Marsh, fellow of St John's college, Cambridge, who had studied at Leipzig under Michaelis, published in four volumes (1793-1801) a translation of the latter's Introduction to the New Testament, together with essays and a dissertation of his own on the sources of the first three Gospels. He did not escape reproof for his rashness; but neither was he debarred from becoming a divinity professor and a bishop. The work had no immediate sequel. English scholarship was not ready for such questions; but, twenty-four years later, another future bishop, Connop Thirlwall, picked up the threads, in introducing to an English public Schleiermacher's A Critical Essay on the Gospel of St Luke. Still more necessary than critical learning was a freer view of biblical inspiration. Theological scholars worked in shackles, if not in blinkers, so long as d priori theories of the inerrancy of Scripture were unchallenged. When the critical methods that were already being applied to other literature should come to be applied to the Bible, a revolution would follow. If, in his Shakespearean studies, said Coleridge, he were to use the same uncritical liberties as divines allowed themselves in harmonising the inconsistencies of Scripture, 'I would almost undertake to harmonise Falstaff's account of the rogues in buckram into a coherent and consistent narrative.' The eighteenth century was seriously lacking in the historic sense; but, so soon as Wolf set himself to prove the plural authorship of the Iliad, and Niebuhr began discussing the origin of the early legends of Roman history, the day was not far distant when similar tests must be applied to biblical literature. The growth of the scientific temper in the new century, with its ruling idea of development, would also create a more sympathetic interest in doctrine viewed historically rather than as absolutely defined. The time was ripe for the advent of Christian scholars who, with a more daring spirit,XIII]

7The Evangelicals

28I

would set their sails to catch the new breezes that were stirring. But in what direction was a truer theology to be looked for? The spirit of religion burned brightest among the evangelical churchmen and methodists. The new century witnessed a new literary venture, The Christian Observer, which enlisted most of the evangelical talent-Henry Thornton, Thomas Scott the commentator and John Venn. The evangelicals were not wanting in ability or energy, but, as a body, had little taste for literature, except of a directly practical purpose. They showed their capacity for meeting the religious needs of their less critical followers in devotional and homiletic literature. Hannah More's Cheap Repository Tracts had an enormous vogue, and a simple moral tale by Legh Richmond, The Dairyman's Daughter, reached two million copies. For more cultivated readers, there was a great outpouring of pious biography. Charles Simeon, with all his wider interests, published almost nothing except homiletic literature, 'skeletons' of sermons, as he frankly called them. Even a professed work of learning like Joseph Milner's History of the Church of Christ (1794-7) aimed chiefly at edification; 'genuine piety is the only thing which I intend to celebrate.' Neither he nor his brother, dean Isaac Milner, who brought the history down to Luther's reformation, thought it necessary to read anything in Luther's language. Evangelical theology concentrated itself upon a few favourite doctrines which formed the scheme of salvation; its language was soon learnt, and it was all-sufficient. The peculiarity of this language, together with its hackneyed use, was enough to deter some minds, as the outspoken baptist minister, John Foster, complained in his essay On the Aversion of MIen of Taste to Evangelical Religion (1805). Even biblical interpretation commanded but a narrow field of interest; the unfulfilled prophecies alone gave scope for speculation. The rigid theory of inspiration, in general, foreclosed enquiry, and the evangelicals retained that theory longest of all. The true glory of the evangelicals lay in their pastoral zeal and in their philanthropy. The Clapham sect, as Sydney Smith nicknamed them, maintained a long struggle against the slave trade, and supported missionary societies and charitable enterprises with princely generosity. William Wilberforce, member of parliament for the county of York, raised a hitherto unpopular and misjudged party in the public esteem when, in 1797, he produced his Practical View of Christianity. It found more readers than any282 he Growth of Liberal 7Theology [CH. book by a clergyman; its effect is comparable with that of The Serious Call. It had, however, none of William Law's wit, though its writer was deemed by Madame de Stael the wittiest talker she had met in England. 'The present state of things in France, where a brood of moral vipers, as it were, is now hatching,' was the occasion for the serious self-examination proposed in it. 'We bear upon us but too plainly the marks of a declining empire.' The author sees no hope of averting this ruin, except by a revival of real Christianity, as contrasted with 'the decent selfishness' which passed muster with most Christians. 'The grand defect' in these nominal Christians is that they forget the peculiar doctrines of the Religion which they profess-the corruption of human nature-the atonement of the Saviour-and the sanctifying influence of the Holy Spirit. But, apart from this sincere allegiance to the orthodox language, Wilberforce, as Sir James Stephen has shown, 'was very much a latitudinarian.' His catholic spirit had no taste for polemical divinity, and he gave himself, as he advised others to give themselves, to practical Christianity. Among the evangelicals there was not enough of speculative interest to revive and liberate theology. Emancipation would not come from them. It came in part from an unexpected quarter, from the poet-philosopher and amateur theologian, Samuel Taylor Coleridge. From early days, he was in revolt against the utilitarian fashion in philosophy and in theology, and it became his aim, as Julius Hare said, to spiritualise both the one and the other. It was high time that philosophy should again have a hearing in English religion, as it had already had in Germany. English theology had been suffering, for at least a generation, from the poverty of its intellectual interest; it was Coleridge's province to stimulate that interest, as a long succession of religious thinkers have amply testified. Coleridge would himself have recognised the truth and the pathos of Charles Lamb's description of him as 'an archangel a little damaged.' The contrast between his spiritual ideals and his sordid failures was as painful to him as it could be to his friends. He laboured under a deep conviction of sin which gave a personal intensity to his Confessions, as, for instance, when he says that, in the Bible, he has 'found words for my inmost thoughts, songs for my joy, utterances for my hidden griefs, and pleadings for my shame and my feebleness.' The theological reading of this 'literary cormorant,' as he called himself, was discursive. He leaptXIII] Erskine of Linlathen 283 contemptuously back over the aevumn rationalisticum into the seventeenth century, where he found poets and divines to his mind. Archbishop Leighton, Jeremy Taylor and other writers of that age furnished him with matter for comment in his Aids to Reflection (1825). Some readers might feel themselves being led into 'a holy jungle' by Coleridge's musings on the persons of the Trinity as representing ipseity, altereity and communeity; but, at least, he gave them more to think about than did the orthodox defenders of the faith in their eminently lucid writings. It was time that someone called a halt to the prevailing mode in theological literature. Evidences of Christianity! I am weary of the word. Make a man feel the want of it; rouse him, if you can, to the self-knowledge of his need of it; and you may safely trust it to its own evidence. Confessions of an Enquiring Spirit was published by his nephew, posthumously, in 1840. These seven letters on inspiration, simpler in style and thought than most of Coleridge's writings, are a remarkable anticipation of the attitude of modern Christians towards the Bible. Coleridge exhibits a happy union of complete freedom and of deep gratitude for the Scriptures. He combats the contemporary view that the Bible was not to be 'reasoned about in the way that other good books are.' He maintains that 'the Bible and Christianity are their own sufficient evidence.' In the Bible there is more that finds me than I have experienced in all other books put together;... the words of the Bible find me at greater depths of my being; and... whatever finds me brings with it an irresistible evidence of its having proceeded from the Holy Spirit. He rests secure on his 'own dear experience' and, regardless of discrepancies and moral imperfections in the Scriptures, pursues his study 'with free and unboding spirit.' If Coleridge's theological influence depended less on his books than on his conversation and friendship with religious thinkers, the same is hardly less true of another contemporary layman, Thomas Erskine of Linlathen. Erskine's natural gift lay rather in intimate spiritual converse and letters than in set writing. In mid-life he ceased to publish books, as if himself questioning his effectiveness as an author; but, for another thirty years, he talked and wrote to those who would find more readers than he ever could. Among his friends he counted Carlyle, Maurice, Stanley and McLeod Campbell, besides an interesting group of Christians on the continent, with whom, also, he corresponded, Vinet, Gaussen, Adolphe Monod and C. C. J. Bunsen. Erskine's writings, however, have considerable importance, in spite of their amateurishness and lack284 The Growth of Liberal Theo/ogy

[CH.

of method: 'your books,' wrote Maurice, in dedicating Prophets and Kings to him, 'seem to me to mark a crisis in the theological movement of this time.' While the orthodox Scottish divines of Erskine's younger days grimly propounded 'the sovereign decrees' of unbending Calvinism, there was room for his assertion in The Unconditional Freeness of the Gospel (1828) that 'Christ died, not for believers, but for the world.' Forgiveness, he declared, 'is a permanent condition of the heart of God'; 'God's arms are open.' Man must not claim even faith as the ground of his pardon; if he does so claim, it is only an instance of his unextinguished pride; 'He must have self to lean on, and so when he is obliged to surrender his own works, he betakes himself to his own faith as his prop. But this is still self.' The satiric humour, as well as the strong mystical vein in his writings, recalls William Law, who was one of Erskine's favourite authors. In the comparatively few writers whom his defective eyesight allowed him to study, he looked for 'light' rather than for theological learning: he preferred Plato and the neo-Platonists, Leighton and Law, to professional divines and their critical opponents. He dismisses a polemical writer with the judgment: 'he is a great reasoner: but I do not find any light in him at all. The thing itself he does not see, but he can give many powerful arguments for it.' Any reader will feel that Erskine saw 'the thing itself,' whether he could rightly explain it or not; the inner witness of the heart was to him a more compelling authority than Scripture or creed. Before he could accept doctrinal statements, his conscience must approve them as right and true. We may recognise Erskine's influence in McLeod Campbell's attempts to moralise the doctrine of atonement1, and Maurice's insistence2 on the ethical meaning of eternal life. But, if much of Erskine's characteristic teaching came into circulation through the writers whom he inspired, his Letters (1877) and occasional volumes will never lack readers who prefer to go to the fountain-head, to draw their own immediate inspiration from one for whom religion was not 'a mere set of notions' but 'God within us.' Meanwhile, new life began to stir in the universities. At Oxford, Oriel college was reaping the advantages of its reforming zeal. Ruled in succession by two energetic provosts, Eveleigh and Copleston, who encouraged their pupils to reason freely, the college became noted during Copleston's provostship (1814-28) for the 1 The Nature of the Atonement, 1856. 2 Theological Essays, 1853.XIII]

1he Noetics

285

unfettered criticism indulged in by its fellows. Oxford nicknamed them the noetics or intellectuals, and had some reason to fear and dislike the Oriel common-room. A society accustomed to defer to authority and the voice of tradition was a little shocked by the freedom with which the Oriel men submitted anything and everything to criticism. They favoured reform alike in academic and in ecclesiastical politics. They had no agreed programme, and formed no party; yet their friendship and common aims were likely to make them a considerable influence in the church, when they should be called to the high office to which their gifts entitled them. To form a party was never their wish; indeed, it would have defeated their chief object, which was the creation of a habit of intellectual independence. Richard Whately, the ablest and the most typical of the group, consistently repudiated any such ambition; in 1843, he wrote to Lady Osborne, Is it getting up a faction for me you are after? No, I'll have no Whatelyites.... Anyone who tries to imitate me, is sure to be unlike me in the important circumstance of being an imitator; and no one can think as I do who does not think for himself. He showed a touch of his quality in his first literary venture, published anonymously in 1819, Historic Doubts relative to Napoleon Buonaparte, a reductio ad absurdum of the method of Hume's Essay on Miracles. Whately, on his solitary walks, 'chopping logic by himself,' or in company disallowing any inexact use of terms (even on his death-bed he took his chaplain to task for misquoting St Paul), is a rather formidable figure, a little disdainful of lesser minds. But, if his reasoning powers were alarming, he, too, had his limitations: 'he was the least equipped with books,' said J. S. Mill of him, 'among any of the great thinkers of his times.' There was no room for poetry or mysticism, and little room for awe in his somewhat arid mind; and he grievously failed to do justice to 'the tractites.' Yet Whately's anonymous Letters on the Church, By an Episcopalian (1826) had given his pupil, Newman, the latter's first conception of the church as a spiritual society independent of the state. Whately's ruling commonsense made him equally dislike the extremes of what he called 'the doubting school,' and he lived long enough to denounce Essays and Reviews in the House of Lords. But, in his Oxford days, and even after he became archbishop of Dublin in 1831, he brought into English theology a wholesome breath of commonsense. Many cobwebs of speculative divinity were blown away, when he insisted that the Bible 'has no286 The Growth of Liberal 7Theology

[CH.

technical vocabulary,' and that it is more important to get the drift of a whole passage than to build upon isolated texts. A similar service was rendered by Whately's Oriel contemporary, Richard Denn Hampden, when, in his Bampton lectures (1832), he contrasted the simplicity of the New Testament language with the elaborate superstructure of 'logical theology' There was a saying of John Foster, a writer whom Hampden sometimes quotes, 'I deem it the wisest rule to use precisely the language of Scripture'; similarly, Hampden preferred Scripture to scholastic definition. The language of theology should be regarded as symbolical: therefore, to deduce further from its terms 'is like making every circumstance in an emblem or metaphor the ground of scientific deduction.' Moreover, the advocate's desire to defend these scholastic propositions makes the interpretation of Scripture oversolicitous and predetermined, rather than open and natural. The interpreter is intent on a process rather than 'a mere follower of Revelation'; the 'fact' will be accommodated to the theory. We must note, however, as still characteristic even of liberal divines at this time that, while Hampden will rigorously criticise any inferences from Scripture, he asserts without qualification that 'whatever is recorded in those books is indisputably true.' The book has its inconsistencies and its limitations; but it shows its author, under the influence of the new scientific spirit, to be before his time in his interest in the evolution of doctrine. His depreciation of church traditions and formulas, and, still more, his advocacy, in 1834, of the admission of dissenters to the universities ('tests are no part of religious education'), drew upon him the open hostility of the tractarians, who were now strong enough to try conclusions with the liberal 'apostasy.' Hampden, the unwilling protagonist in this scene, cut no very happy figure in extricating himself from charges of heterodoxy. He had himself to thank for some misunderstandings; but his enemies showed little scruple in making all the mischief they could, both in 1836, when he was appointed regius professor of divinity at Oxford, and, again, eleven years later, when he was nominated to the bishopric of Hereford. The judgment of principal Tulloch on Hampden deserves to be weighed in the scales against the steady depreciation of his 'confused thinking' by the tractarians: 'There are seeds of thought in Dr Hampden's writings far more fertile and enduring than any to be found in the writings of his chief opponents.' The early Oriel liberals are, as a whole, disappointing. ThereXIII]

Th omas Arnold

287

was in them more of dry light than of divine fire. But, if the charge of coldness fairly lies against some of them, it has no meaning in the case of the most attractive and most influential of their number, Thomas Arnold. If 'tendencies to SocinianisIn' could be detected in Hampden or Whately, Arnold might defy his worst enemy to find them in his writings. Only Newman, in a moment of scepticism, could question Arnold's right to be called a Christian. His fervid devotion to Christ radiates through all his sermons and letters, and gives them a glow of life, long after the writings of his liberal contemporaries have ceased to live. Of Arnold, at least, it could not be said that he hoped to 'heal the hurt of his people lightly' with useful knowledge and facile optimism. Though he valued knowledge, and was possessed of 'even cheerfulness,' he could speak naturally and effectively the deeper language of the soul. If he was not himself a great thinker or critic, he excelled as a teacher and preacher in cultivating the habit of moral thoughtfulness. His sermons reflect at once his robust good sense and his contagious earnestness; they are, above all, alive and breathe the mountain air: 'I will not give my boys,' he said, 'to drink out of stagnant waters.' To older audiences and to his readers he offered stronger meat, but still avoided the technical language of theology and the jargon of the pulpit: 'into that common language, in which we think and feel, all truth must be translated, if we would think and feel respecting it at once rightly, clearly, and vividly.' He had learnt something of the scientific method of history from Niebuhr, and was not afraid of its application to Biblical study. On the historical and moral difficulties of the Bible, he had much to say in his sermons, and, though a modern reader would find his treatment of such difficulties only mildly critical, yet it reveals a sense of proportion, which augured well for the future of such studies. If my faith in God and my hope of eternal life is to depend on the accuracy of a date or of some minute historical particular, who can wonder that I should listen to any sophistry that may be used in defence of them, or that I should force my mind to do any sort of violence to itself, when life and death seem to hang on the issue of its decision? Arnold's desire for unity amounted to a passion, which overrode even necessary distinctions: he was for fusing church and state, clergy and laity, secular and religious, the human and the divine. In his hands, this treatment was safe enough, because the higher term prevailed in such union; but, for less noble natures, it spelt confusion. His hatred of all division and party spirit made28 8 The Growth of Liberal Theology [CH. him tolerant in principle, but a bitter opponent of what he believed to be intolerance. When his friend Hampden was attacked in 1836, he struck out at 'the Oxford malignants' in The Edinburgh Review with an invective which disturbed even his supporters. But, already, before his premature death, on 12 June 1842, the eve of his forty-eighth birthday, he had adopted a broader and more tranquil outlook, especially after the kindly reception which he obtained from former opponents at Oxford on his becoming, in 1841, regius professor of modern history. Arnold's most celebrated Rugby pupil, Arthur Penrhyn Stanley, has described a scene from his boyhood in 1834 which brings together representatives of most of the types of liberal theology mentioned in this chapter. As he sat in the library of Hurstmonceaux rectory, where he noticed the preponderance of German books, Julius Hare's curate, John Sterling, came in with the current number of The Quarterly Review, noticing Coleridge's death and containing an article on his poetry. On the same occasion, the friends discussed the unpublished manuscript of Confessions of an Enquiring Spirit, and agreed to submit it to Arnold for his advice as to its publication. Julius Hare, contemporary and friend of Connop Thirlwall at Charterhouse and Trinity college, Cambridge, who, ten years later, became the brother-in-law of his pupil, Frederick Denison Maurice, was a link between many generations. His chief work, The Mission of the Comforter (1846), he dedicated 'to the honoured memory of Samuel Taylor Coleridge,' and he repeatedly mentioned his profound obligation to the Cambridge philosopher, whom many of the Oxford lights, like Whately, disparaged as a misty thinker. As Maurice remarks, Hare cannot be suspected, as many have been, of resorting to Coleridge because, at his restaurant, German cookery was adapted to weak English stomachs, not yet prepared to receive it in its genuine form; for Hare knew the taste of German dishes and had partaken of them fearlessly. Hare and Thirlwall were as well acquainted as any Englishmen of their day with German literature, yet they retained a thoroughly English outlook. They collaborated in the translation and editing of Schleiermacher's St Luke (1825) and of Niebuhr's History of Rome (1828-32). They both recognised the necessity of applying the newer historical method to the study of the Scriptures, and were upheld in that view by a belief in the progressive unfolding of religious truth. If Christians accepted the dispensation of the Spirit, said Thirlwall, they must believe that 'His laterXIII] Fre'deric Denison Maurice 289 lessons may well transcend His earlier.' He did not expect his English readers to accept all the conclusions of Schleiermacher, but to diffuse the spirit of impartial criticism more extensively among ourselves in the study of the sacred writings, when it has hitherto been either wholly wanting or confined to very subordinate points, was also the translator's principal object. 'I do not believe,' wrote Hare, 'that there is any other living man who has done anything at all approaching to what Maurice has effected in reconciling the reason and the conscience of the thoughtful men of our age to the faith of our church.' Maurice was a religious teacher more than a critic: indeed, for biblical criticism, he had no great liking or aptitude. Rather, he was in the true succession to Coleridge and Erskine: the latter's Brazen Serpyent (1831) had helped him, as it helped McLeod Campbell, to find his gospel. The son of a unitarian minister, member of a family sharply divided in its religious allegiance, Maurice believed himself called 'from my cradle' to the pursuit of unity. He was persuaded, like J. S. Mill, that thinking people were, for the most part, right in what they affirmed, wrong in what they denied. He believed that each church party asserted some great truth, and in The Religions of the World (1847), an early example of the comparative study of religions in this country, he showed the same anxiety to appreciate all positive excellence. But his breadth of sympathy was not indifference or vagueness. He had nothing in common with the 'hang theology' air of some broad churchmen, or with the contemporary shyness of dogmatic statement. 'Theology,' he declared, 'is what our age is crying out for, even when it thinks that it is crying to be rid of theology.' He saw the necessity of clearing current theology of what he took to be erroneous and even immoral teaching. He was deeply concerned so to state the doctrine of atonement as not to offend the moral sense, and he resented, as warmly as Mill, Mansel's suggestion that the justice of God 'is not the kind of justice which would be expected of men.' The starting point of all his theology was the love of God, not the sinfulness of man. This was his best inheritance from his unitarian upbringing; he remained surer of the infinite love of God than of any other doctrine, and he examined all current religious belief in the light of this ruling idea. Here, he believed, was a gospel for all mankind; any limitation of it he attacked with an almost savage intensity. He gibbeted

E. L. X II CH. XIII.

19290 7he Growth of Liberal Th/eology

[CH.

his opponents as giving, in effect, Christ's good news in these reduced terms: Your Father has created multitudes whom He means to perish for ever and ever. By my agony and bloody sweat, by my cross and passion, I have induced Him in the case of an inconceivably small minority to forego that design. A divine who could write and speak in this strain showed more courage than discretion; he was bound to be misunderstood and mistrusted. He knew himself what to expect; 'when I wrote the sentence about eternal death, I was writing my own sentence at King's College.' It may be felt that Maurice forced upon the New Testament language an interpretation of eternal punishment to square with his belief in the 'infinite' love of God, rather than that he came to his decision from an unimpassioned study of the text. But he was a prophet of great ideas, which consumed and fired him, not an exact student of philology and history. He had, also, that mystical quality of mind which was lacking in the Oxford liberals. He sought to read the eternal in the manifestations of it in time: 'we must have the eternal, which our fathers nearly forgot.' With the same disregard of popularity and the same risk of misunderstanding, Maurice proclaimed himself a Christian socialist; 'I seriously believe,' he wrote, 'that Christianity is the only foundation of Socialism, and that a true Socialism is the necessary result of a sound Christianity.' But, though both Christians and socialists hastened to disown him, the direction which he gave to Christian thinking has been extensively followed, so that much of what he taught, whether of a more universal theology or of a truer Christian brotherhood, has become the commonplace of the pulpit. As his friend Kingsley had hoped, Christians came to accept the teaching of Theological Essays (1853) 'not as a code complete, but as a hint towards a new method of thought.' Maurice was more capable of giving hints than precise directions, and even the hints were sometimes unnecessarily indistinct. But he was not wilfully obscure; if he was less lucid than the Oriel liberals, it was partly because he was struggling to plumb greater depths of religious experience. It is characteristic of the changing times to find Maurice associated with Kingsley and Robertson, in 1851, in giving a course of sermons in a London church on the message of the church to rich and poor. Robertson's turn came first; Kingsley wasXIII]

Robertson of Brighton

291

inhibited by the bishop of London after delivering the second; and the third was consequently never delivered. If Maurice was outspoken, and Robertson impetuous, 'Parson Lot' was vehement; 'when once fairly let loose upon the prey,' wrote W. R. Greg of him, 'all the Red Indian within him comes to the surface, and he wields the tomahawk with an unbaptized heartiness.' Though Kingsley made no original contribution to theological thinking, he was a successful populariser of Maurice's teaching, and applied it to the social questions of the day with remarkable directness. Nor was he a mere echo of Maurice; his romantic love of nature and of all things that have breath and his fine humanity were great gifts for a preacher. Frederick Robertson's reputation was won in the face of obstacles. He entered the Anglican ministry without any academic fame, and, for some years, had neither success nor happiness, owing to uncongenial surroundings and his own extreme sensitiveness. For barely six years, he ministered in a small proprietary chapel in Brighton. When death took him thence, in 1853, at the age of thirty-seven, he had published only a few casual sermons, and yet, already, he was known as a unique preacher. Five volumes of his sermons were posthumously printed. Their form is unfinished; some of them are only his extensive notes, others are the products of amateur reporting. Yet no sermons of that period, not even Newman's, have found so wide a range of readers. They are like no other sermons; they owe almost nothing recognisable to works of theological learning; they do not reflect the theology of any master-mind or of any party. Robertson preserves his independence till it becomes to him an almost painful isolation. He thinks his own way through the difficulties, and, though his exegesis may be unwarranted, it is never uninteresting. He avoids the technical terms of the schools, and yet his sermons are full of doctrinal teaching, conveyed by suggestion rather than by dogmatic exposition. A typical example of his habit of mind is afforded by his sermon 'On the Glory of the Virgin Mother.' He is not content to point out the dangers of the cult of the Virgin; its very prevalence establishes for him the probability that it 'has a root in truth.' We assume it as a principle that no error has ever spread widely, that was not the exaggeration or perversion of a truth. And be assured that the first step towards dislodging error is to understand the truth at which it aims. It matters little whether fierce Romanism or fierce Protestantism wins the day: but it does matter whether or not in a conflict we lose some precious Christian truth, as well as the very spirit of Christianity. 19-229 2 7Te Growth of Liberal Theology [CH. An enquiry begun in this spirit could not fail to be constructive rather than destructive. A generation that felt its doubts acutely was fortunate to have such men as Maurice and Robertson for its preachers. While they criticised what they believed to be faulty or obsolete modes of theological expression, their main concern was to lose nothing which had spiritual value. Their influence was more enduring than that of the Oxford liberals, whose early promise had hardly justified itself. In spite of their intellectual ability and vigorous self-assertion, the Oriel men stirred little general enthusiasm, and were soon attracting less attention in Oxford itself than the second movement which emanated from the Oriel common-room. The tractarians were in full reaction against the liberals; in Newman's eyes 'the great apostasy is Liberalism in religion.' There was, for a while, a serious set-back and discouragement of free enquiry. Moreover, the liberal theologians of the next generation spoke with less confidence than the Whatelys and Arnolds. The difficulties of faith were increasing under the pressure of many convergent lines of modern enquiry, and the concessions asked for were heavier and nearer the heart of Christian teaching. Strauss's Life of Jesis (1835), which George Eliot translated in 1846, opened anew for English readers the whole question of the supernatural. The problems suggested by physical science were hardly less urgent. Scientific knowledge had been rapidly advancing all through the century, though its bearing on the traditional theology was not at frst perceived. But queen Victoria's reign had not proceeded far before there was a more general appreciation of the difficulties of reconciling new and old ways of thinking. The spirit of doubt, even if it were reluctant and ill at ease, obtruded itself in poet and essayist and historian, as well as in philosopher and theologian. Many who had started in the following of Newman, like Mark Pattison and James Anthony Froude, instead of following him to Rome, had recovered from their enthusiasm only to become coldly distrustful of any authority. But, while there were many who lost their faith and drifted into a relation of indifference or positive antagonism to Christianity, there was also a fresh and vigorous attempt on the part of those who sought to combine free thinking with a position inside the Christian church. If the first wave of Oxford liberal thought had long spent itself, it was followed at some interval by a larger wave, which made more stir. The new movement bore a new name. The label 'broad church' is said by Jowett to have beenXIII]

The Broad Churchmen

293

proposed in his hearing by A. IH. Clough, and it came into familiar use in Oxford some years before it received any literary expressionl. In The Edinburgh Review, in 1853, W. J. Conybeare spoke of a third party in the church, 'which is called Moderate or Catholic or Broad Church by its friends, Latitudinarian or Indifferent by its enemies.' He described its distinctive character as the desire for comprehension, and its watchwords as charity and toleration. An organised party they never designed to become: individual independence was their most treasured right. There were many, like Maurice, who unquestionably helped to liberalise theological thought, and yet hated the very notion of party. But there was a fairly coherent band of liberal clergymen, linked by academic friendship or for self-defence, who stood together, both consciously and in the public mind. They advocated a bolder application of critical methods to the Bible than their predecessors would have allowed, and yet their love for the Bible was often conspicuous. As preachers or commentators, many of them exhibited notable gifts for interpretation. The concerted appearance on the same day in 1855 of Jowett's commentary on certain epistles of St Paul and of Stanley's comlmentary on the epistles to the Corinthians, indicated the freer spirit which was beginning to animate English study of the New Testament. The freshness of Jowett's treatment, especially in the dissertations, is still unexhausted. The Pauline terms, which had become hard and unlovely in the hands of schoolmen and reformation doctors, are again alive, as Jowett submits them to the scrutiny of modern psychology. There is, also, an unforgettable picture of the apostle himself, not more remarkable for its delicate intuition than for its emotional quality. A poor aged man, worn by some bodily or mental disorder, who had been often scourged, and bore on his face the traces of indignity and sorrow in every form-such an one, led out of prison between Roman soldiers, probably at times faltering in his utterance, the creature, as he seemed to spectators, of nervous sensibility; yearning, almost with a sort of fondness, to save the souls of those whom he saw around him-spoke a few eloquent words in the cause of Christian truth, at which kings were awed, telling the tale of his own conversion with such simple pathos, that after-ages have hardly heard the like. The ungenerous treatment which Jowett received from his theological opponents at Oxford was enough to discourage him from further theological studies, and, in succeeding years, Plato received from him more attention than St Paul. But he continued to find expression for his thoughts on religion in regular preaching. 1 See New English Dictionary, s.v. 'Broad.'294 7fhe Growth of Liberal Theology

[CH.

In his posthumous volumes of sermons, he shows more care for simple truths and simple duties than for the controversies of the hour; he encourages a sane and well-balanced outlook on life'that is a maimed soul which loves goodness and has no love of truth, or which loves truth and has no love of goodness'-and he expresses himself as thankful for his church-membership in this ancient house of our fathers, with all its faults the best and most tolerant of the Churches of Christendom, and the least opposed to the spirit of the age. Stanley's commentary was full of human interest, but defective, like the rest of his writings, in critical power. He had many gifts and much miscellaneous knowledge, but never gave himself wholly to any one branch of exact learning. 'What does this remind you of?' was Arnold's favourite question in school, and Stanley was busy answering it the rest of his life. His Lectures on the Jewish Church (1863-76), and most of his many books, abound in historical parallels and similitudes, sometimes felicitous, at other times forced. He had 'a grand curiosity' for the historical and literary associations of place. Ite would sooner describe an heresiarch's country and customs than unravel his exploded opinions. When he was installed dean of Westminster, he hailed as a happy omen the ancient admonition that he was set there 'for the enlargement of the Christian Church.' He proved faithful to his conception of his office in giving the abbey pulpit a more national character; the preachers whom he brought there represented English religious thought of many types. His published sermons reflect his own urbane, cultured and tolerant spirit, his feeling for history and his dramatic sense, but they made no contribution to the theology of the next generation. The publication of Essays and Reviews in 1860 made the broad churchmen a storm-centre as much as Tract XC had done for the high churchmen. It was not intended, but was generally taken to be, the manifesto of a party. The volume was, in fact, the concluding number of a series of Oxford and Cambridge essays, issued annually. The editor, Henry Bristow Wilson, was a country clergyman whose Bampton lectures entitled The Communion of Saints (1851) had already caused him to become suspect. The seven writers consisted of six clergymen, and one layman, Charles Wycliffe Goodwin, an Egyptologist who had resigned his Cambridge fellowship on finding himself unable to take holy orders. They were soon, by an outraged religious public, dubbed Septem contra Christun. Replies, in the shape of books and pamphletsXIII]

Essays and Reviews

295

and articles, continued for many months to be issued. Two of the essayists, Rowland Williams and the editor, were tried and condemned for heresy in the court of arches; their acquittal, on appeal to the judicial committee of the privy council, afforded a valuable protection to liberty of thought within the church of England. But it is not hard to account for the opposition to the essayists. Though many of the essays were blameless and unaggressive, the general effect was negative, and some of the essays were provocative. Maurice complained of the absence of theology in the volume, and especially of the neglect of 'the full revelation of God in Christ' which he believed to be all that was worth preaching. Stanley, who must have symbolised closely with some of the contributors, found fault with its negative character: 'no book which treats of religious questions can hope to make its way to the heart of the English nation unless it gives, at the same time that it takes away.' The editor gave just offence in his essay, 'The National Church' by betraying a greater anxiety to see the church national than Christian. Baden Powell, Savilian professor of geometry at Oxford from 1827, was a survivor from the early Oriel school, and died directly after the issue of Essays and Reviews. He had already written much on the relations of theology and science, and in his essay he pressed the uniformity of nature against the argument for miracle. But for his opportune death, he could hardly have escaped prosecution. His generation would never have tolerated his attempt to free Christian theism from a dependence on miracles. Mark Pattison's essay, 'The Tendencies of Religious Thought, 1688-1750,' was, for the most part, a purely historical survey, and would have avoided criticism if it had not appeared in the incriminating volume. Jowett urged, 'Interpret the Scripture like any other book,' and yet maintained that it would remain unlike any other book. Scripture has an inner life or soul; it has also an outward body or form. That form is language, which imperfectly expresses our common notions, much more those higher truths which religion teaches. His essay, like Frederick Temple's, 'The Education of the World,' was pious and conciliatory, though both included (what, indeed, gives unity to the whole collection of essays) a strong plea for free criticism. 'He is guilty of high treason against the faith,' wrote Temple, 'who fears the result of any investigation, whether philosophical, or scientific, or historical.' Yet, the future archbishop may have had some qualms when he read Rowland Williams's essay on Bunsen's Biblical Researches. The shock was not mediated by296 The Growth of Liberal 7heology

[cH.

the English writer, but rendered liable to cause the maximum of offence. Williams's Psalms and Litanies, published by his widow in 1872, proves him to have had a true devotional feeling, and a desire to enter into communion with the Eternal Spirit, but it also shows how he consistently reduced ancient collects to a unitarian standard. Maurice had, indeed, touched the chief defect of Essays and Reviews, a defect which the lapse of time has made even more apparent. The disparagement of doctrine, and, especially, the neglect to contribute anything to the understanding of the person and nature of Jesus Christ, render it of little service to a later age, which, like other ages before it, sees that here is the core of essentially Christian thinking. The true claim of the essayists to grateful remembrance is that they asserted with one voice the duty of the Christian church to welcome new truth, and the right of her accredited sons to make it known. Not in vain is one of the essavists comnmemoorated on the walls of his college chapel as a scholar q Ii libertatem cleri anglicani feliciter vindicavit. Public opinion was so far in favour of wider theological liberty that the acquittal of the essayists in 1864 was followed next year by the Clerical Subscription act, substituting a general assent to the XXXIX Articles of religion for the ex animo subscription 'to all things therein contained,' which had been required for two centuries. There were similar struggles for freedom in other churches. Scottish theology, which had been eminently conservative, became less provincial as it grew bolder and more critical. In the Free church of Scotland, the biblical contributions of William Robertson Smith to the ninth edition of the Encyclopaedia Britannica excited a growing hostility from 1875 till 1881, when he was removed from his professorial chair at Aberdeen. But there was a larger public ready to form its judgment when he published his popular lectures, The Old Testament in the Jewish Church (1881) and The Prophets of Israel (1882). Freed from ecclesiastical ties, he pursued at Cambridge, till his death in 1894, his original researches into the primitive religions of the Semitic peoples. Prosecutions for heresy and indictments of heterodox publications brought theological questions into general discussion throughout the 'sixties. The magazines, and especially the new Fortnightly Review, often provided the arena. The excitement over Essays and Revietws was not allayed before a new quarry was started by bishop Colenso's free handling of the Pentateuch,XIII]

Ecce Homo

297

which found few whole-hearted defenders in the Christian camp, partly owing to the author's provocative and unfortunate manner. It was more difficult for the contemporary orthodox mind to decide whether the anonymous author of Ecce Homo (1865) was friend or foe. Like Matthew Arnold's essays and many other books of the period, Ecce Homo represents the attempt to save religion in the shipwreck of orthodoxy, and, above all, to save Christian ethics. Its author, who was soon discovered to be John Robert Seeley, at that time professor of Latin in University college, London, intentionally avoided controversial theology. When he was reproached for 'concealing' his theological opinions, he replied that he concealed them 'only in the sense in which the vast majority of the community have concealed them; that is, he has not published them.' Seeley took for granted, as orthodox and heterodox writers commonly did in his generation, that 'almost all men' could agree upon the Christian ethical standard. With an engaging fervour and literary grace, he set before his readers Christ's 'enthusiasm for humanity,' and found in it a motive which could still be for Christians a stronger passion than any other. Christ raised the feeling of humanity from being a feeble restraining power to be an inspiring passion. The Christian moral reformation may indeed be summed up in this-humanity changed from a restraint to a motive. Seeley regarded Christianity as natural fellow-feeling or humanity raised to the point of enthusiasm. He did not think that the world could 'do without Christ and his Church.' Indeed, he reckoned the person of Christ to be of more account than anything which he said or did: 'Christ's discovery is himself.' The moral teaching of the New Testament, for instance, the law of forgiveness, 'Christ's most striking innovation in morality,' was commended by Seeley to his generation with greater freshness and charm than by any other writer. No one could miss his meaning or ever forget his fine tribute to the distinctive note of Christian morality. There was much to discourage the Christian advocate in the 'seventies. Neither science nor culture was inclined to be docile. Huxley made merry in the monthly reviews, and Matthew Arnold subjected the defenders of traditional theology to successive volleys of Gallic raillery. Confidence was restored to the orthodox ranks, less by the concessions of broad churchmen or the defence of orthodox apologists, than by the rise of a school of historical criticism. If the appeal was to be to scholarship,298 Ihe Growthz of Liberal 7Theology

[CH.

even the general reader would soon see that sound learning and candour were not all on one side. A notable part in the creation of an improved theological scholarship was played by three Cambridge contemporaries and friends, Brooke Foss Westcott, Fenton John Anthony Hort, and Joseph Barber Lightfoot. The tractarian scholars had been chiefly interested in the age of the councils; the Cambridge scholars devoted themselves to the study of Christian origins. Westcott and Hort's main work was the recension of the Greek text of the New Testament; Lightfoot was concerned with the Pauline epistles and the apostolic Fathers. Their work was timely and valuable, but they would have been the last to regard it as final. They shared the characteristic belief of the liberal theologians in the progressive apprehension of Christian truth. 'Let us all thank God,' said bishop:Westcott to his clergy, at the close of his long life of teaching, 'that He has called us to unfold a growing message, and not to rehearse a stereotyped tradition.' 'Christianity,' wrote Hort, 'is not an uniform and monotonous tradition, but to be learned only by successive steps of life.' Hort's passion for meticulous accuracy and his extreme caution caused him to publish little, and his shyness stood in the way of his influence as an oral teacher. Yet his posthumous Hulsean lectures, The Way the Truth the Life, revealed him as a master of pregnant phrase. Centuries of speculation on the doctrine of atonement are arraigned by the terse judgment: 'Theologies which have sundered God's righteousness from His love have done equal wrong to both.' While Christian scholarship was thus holding its own, there was also a welcome escape from the determinist and utilitarian fashions in philosophy. At Oxford, Thomas Henry Green, tutor of Balliol, exercised a strong spiritual influence over those whom criticism was compelling to discard 'the fair humanities of old religion.' James Martineau, of an older generation than Green, did not publish any of his more important books till his eightieth year. In earlier life, Martineau had adopted the determinist and utilitarian theories of morals, but he proved their effective critic in his octogenarian volume, Types of Ethical Theory (1885). Three years later, he vindicated theistic belief in A Study of Religion. The critical principles for which liberal theologians had had to do battle were by this time no longer the badges of their tribe, but were accepted by most educated Christians. For instance, high churchmen had travelled more than half way fromXIII]

George Tyrrell

299

the tractarian to the liberal position, when, in 1889, a group of Oxford friends combined, in Lux Mlundi, to make a re-statement of Christian faith; 'it needs disencumbering, re-interpreting, explaining.' 'It is the test of the Church's legitimate tenure that she can encourage free inquiry into her title-deeds.' Cross-currents of theological opinion have become in recent years increasingly noticeable. If high churchmen have adopted a freer biblical criticism, broad churchmen and free churchmen have ceased to belittle the idea of the church. Theology becomes more and more cosmopolitan, and oversteps denominational boundaries. Even that church which rates highest the principle of authority has had its disciplinary difficulties with those sons who seek to create a catholic atmosphere in which the modern mind may breathe more freely. The modernist movement is yet too near and unexhausted to find historical treatment, were it not that its most brilliant English representative, George Tyrrell, has already written his last word. The title of one of his earlier books, Nova et Vetera, is a fit symbol of his lifelong attempt to adjust new and old. His mind was delicately sensitive to every modern pressure, yet he loved the past and would lose none of its heritage: 'The new must be made out of the old, must retain and transcend all its values.' The very word catholic, said the Abbe Brdmond at his graveside, was music to his ears; he was more securely catholic than Christian. Now he would be wondering whether the Christianity of the future would consist 'of mysticism and charity, and possibly the Eucharist in its primitive form as the outward bond'; now he would look longingly back to the church of his baptism; and yet again give a last loyalty to the church of his adoption. He was still probing this way and that for sure foothold when death interrupted his pilgrimage. 'Had I been Moses I don't think I should have felt not entering the Land of Promise one bit, so long as I knew that Israel would do so one day.' It is inevitable that Tyrrell's career should be compared with Newman's; he made the comparison himself in one of the latest of his essays. 'Be my soul with the Saints! says Newman, looking away from Anglicanism towards the altars of Rome. But is there not a wider Communion of Saints, whereof the canonised are but a fraction, and whose claims are founded, not in miracles or prodigies, but in that sincerity to truth and righteousness, without which even orthodoxy were nothing worth? Be my soul with such saints, whatever their creed and communion!CHAPTER XIV

HISTORIANS WRITERS ON ANCIENT AND EARLY ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY WITH the eighteenth century, or, more precisely, in its concluding decade, the last two of its three great British historians had passed away; and it was as if, beneath the shadow of the imposing names of Hume, Robertson and Gibbon, no growth of rival dignity and splendour could venture to rear its head. During the ensuing years of long-sustained national effort, few minds cared to concentrate themselves upon a close study of past public life. Yet, when this period came to an end with the Napoleonic, that had grown out of the revolutionary, wars, it was not, in the first instance, a patriotic impulse which turned attention back to historical studies. Nor, although in our literature the efforts of the romantic school were then at their height, and although, both here and in other countries, the influence of Scott, more powerfully than that of any other poet or prose writer, changed alike the spirit and the form of historical composition, were the revival of the study of history and the reassertion of the claim of historians to a place of honour among English writers due, primarily at all events, to an intellectual reaction. The motive force which, first and foremost, inspired the new progress of English historical literature in the nineteenth century is to be sought in what has been aptly called the second revival of classical learning in Europe, but what may be more exactly described as the beginnings of later critical scholarship. In the field of history, the search for materials and the examination of them now first became an integral part of the historian's task, without pretending to supersede composition, or, in other words, the literary or artistic side of his labours. F. A. Wolf had led the way on which, in Greek historical studies, Otfried MiillerCH. XIV] Inifuence of NieAuhr 301 and Boeckh1 followed; but it was Niebuhr who placed historical writing on an entirely new basis; and it was his immortal History of Rome which first conveyed to his English contemporaries a clear perception of the uses of the critical method in the treatment of history. We shall, therefore, not go far wrong in starting in our present summary from near the point at which we closed that of English historical literature in the eighteenth century2, speaking, in the first instance, of English contributions to ancient history in the nineteenth. Niebuhr's title to hold a high and enduring place among historians rests, above all, on his having been the first to apply, on a grand scale and to an important subject (the growth of the national life of a great popular community), the critical method which had become indispensable to the discovery of historical truth. Of this method he made use in his masterpiece, the Romani History, which was something very different from a mere assault on the traditional view of his subject; nor was he, by any means, the first to impugn the authority of the accepted narrative3. On the other hand, his explanation of that account as mainly due to the influence of a popular ballad-literature cannot be said to have ultimately established itself as sufficient. The permanent strength of Niebuhr's great work lay elsewhere-in the force of his imagination and in his steadfast adherence to the belief in the moral principles which underlie legal institutions freely adopted by freemen, as determining the continuance and prosperity of a political community. So much it seemed necessary to premise, in order to account for the impression made by Niebuhr upon Englishmen who, in the first and second quarters of the nineteenth century, were shaking off the isolation which, in the preceding period of the great wars, had kept English learning and letters more or less apart from continental, and who were eager to breathe the free air of research and enquiry. One of these was Julius Hare, perhaps best known to posterity by Guesses at Truth (1827), written by him in conjunction with his brother Augustus. Julius Hare was 1 Wolf's Prolegomena ad Homerum appeared, in Latin, in 1795. Boeckh's Public Economy of Athens was translated into English in 1828 by (Sir) G. Cornewall Lewis, and K. O. Miiller's Dorians by the same and H. Tufnell in 1830. 2 See ante, vol. x, p. 320. 3 In a review, for instance, of Tytler's Roman History published in The Literary Journal in 1803 by James Mill, a strong protest is made against accepting as true the record of the Roman kings, or, generally, of the transactions supposed to have taken place before the fall of Carthage: which is precisely the position of Sir G. C. Lewis.302

Historians

[CH.

an early lover of German literature, with which he had first become familiar at Weimar in the classical days of 1804-5. In 1828-32, he united with his schoolfellow and brother fellow of Trinity, Connop Thirlwall, in publishing a translation of Niebuhr's Roman History. Their first volume was vehemently denounced in The Quarterly Review' as the product of scepticism; so that, in 1829, Julius Hare put forth a Vindication of Niebuhr's History from these charges. Another follower of Niebuhr was Thomas Arnold, headmaster of Rugby from 1827, to whom Niebuhr himself ascribed the first introduction of his Roman History to the British public2. Arnold, on first becoming acquainted, in his studious days at Laleham, with Niebuhr's work, had been reluctant to accept all his conclusions, but had gradually grown unwilling to dissociate himself from any of them. In 1827, he paid a memorable visit to the master at Bonn, where he formed a lasting friendship with Bunsen, Niebuhr's successor at Rome and the zealous transmitter of many of his historical ideas. Arnold had by this time resolved upon testifying, after an enduring fashion, to his almost unbounded admiration for a historian with whose genius his own had certain affinities-notably, the union of deep religious conviction with a sturdy liberalism, due, in Niebuhr's case, to the influence of descent, while, in Arnold's, it was nowhere stronger than in his view of priestcraft as the fellow antichrist to utilitarian unbelief. Arnold's interest in historical work had always been great, and, while, like Niebuhr's, it was closely associated with philological studies, it particularly directed itself to geographical and topographical research, in their bearing upon history. He had begun historical composition with a short history of Greece, which never saw the light3, and with a series of articles on Roman 1 In a review of Granville's Travels in Russia, vol. xxxix, no. 77 (1829). 2 This was in an earlier article in The Quarterly Review, vol. xxxII, no. 63 (1825), which directs attention to the originality of Niebuhr and Mitford, whom it describes as deserving the credit of the earliest modern discoverers in Grecian and Roman history, and to whose account of the origin of the agrarian laws, as well as that of the Roran army, Arnold offers a warm tribute. While deprecating agreement with some of Niebuhr's paradoxes, he goes on to vindicate the claims of the true, as distinguished from the false, spirit of enquiry. 3 A History of Greece (1835) was one of the many historical books of Thomas Keightley, who also wrote a History of the War of Greek Independence (1830) and a much used Mythology of Ancient Greece and Italy (1831). Keightley, who bears the responsibility of a considerable proportion of historical instruction in this country in the earlier half of the century, began, like a good history master, with Outlines of General History (1815), which held its humble place for many years. It was followed by a large number of school-books and publications of a kindred description, and, as a historical writer, he earned the respect of many scholars, together with the gratitude of a long succession of schoolmasters. The History of Greece, if it may be taken as anXIV]

Arnold's Roman History

303

history from the second Punic war onwards to the age of Trajan1 -a period which Niebuhr, had he ever reached it in his History, would have treated as one of decay. (Arnold's edition of Thucydides, where the topographical element is not wanting, is mentioned in a subsequent chapter.) But it was in his History of Rome that, inspired by Niebuhr's, he first essayed a historical narrative on a large scale. The book appeared in three volumes, reaching to the end of the second Punic war (1828-42); the History of the later Roman Commonwealth followed posthumously, in 1845. It is, of course, above all in the earlier parts of the work that the spiritus of his great exemplar dominates the scene. 'I need not tell you,' Arnold writes to Bunsen in 1836, 'how entirely 1 have fed upon Niebuhr; in fact, I have done little more than put his first volume into a shape more fit for general, or at least for English, readers, assuming his conclusions to be proved when he was obliged to give the proof in detail.' Yet the work, as a whole, was very far from being a mere secondhand reproduction; his independence of judgment and openness of outlook would, in any case, have made this impossible; and it was precisely in the period before reaching which his predecessor's narrative breaks off, and in his account of the mighty conflict of the second Punic war itself that Arnold's powers as a historian rise to their height. His capacity for military and geographical expositions and statements here found the amplest opportunity for display: he loved this side of his task, and, as he writes, 'thirsted for Zama2.' At the same time, no student or writer of history has ever been more conscious than Arnold of the responsibility implied in Acton's memorable saying3 that 'if we lower our standard in History, we cannot uphold it in Church and State.' When speaking, with that inborn modesty which was part of his constant homage to truth, of the many advantages which he lacked in carrying on the 'overpowering labour of writing the history of Rome,' he added: Yet I feel that I have the love of history so strong in me, and that it has been working in me so many years, that I can write something which will be read, example of his particular histories, is not free from slips-possibly not all his own-but is quite readable. He was a man of many literary sympathies, and his biographical account of Milton was long in the hands of the public. He was an Irishman by birth and education, like Dionysius Lardner, to the historical section of whose Cabinet Cyclopaedia (1829-49) he was a contributor, together with Thirlwall and Mackintosh, Scott, Southey and Moore, Gleig, Forster and (for chronology) Sir N. Harris Nicolas. This collection must be distinguished from Lardner's other series, The Critical Library and from The Edinburgh Cabinet Library, which also contained some historical works. 1 These were published (posthumously) in 1845. 2 See Life and Correspondence (1844), vol. II, p. 71. 3 Inaugural Lecture On the Study of History (1895), ad fin.304

Historians

[CH.

and which I trust will encourage the love of all things noble and just, and wise and lovely1. This sense of the grandeur and dignity of his theme the English historian of free Rome took over from the conception and development of his narrative into its style. Though clearness and directness of speech were like a natural law to him in all his public utterances, he told his nephew that it had cost him trouble so to 'pitch his style' in his History as to bring it to the level of his subject; and he afterwards said of his work, in words which it would be well if some historians not less eminent than he could have applied to theirs: I feel to regard the History more and more with something of an artistic feeling as to composition and arrangement of it-points on which the ancients laid great stress, and I now think very rightly2. To the great satisfaction of what was already an important part of Oxford, Arnold was, in 1841, appointed regius professor of modern history there, and at once threw himself with his wonted energy into the fulfilment of his new duties. Although he died in the following year, he had lived long enough to justify the only official tribute which his friends in power ever paid to his deserts; and it is probable that, before very long, he would have exchanged Rugby, where the chief work of his life had been done, for Oxford. He had enough insight as well as knowledge to perceive the folly of attempting to draw a hard and fast line between the civilisation of Greece and Rome and the progress of what is called modern history; and it is quite likely that, had his life been prolonged, he might have carried on his chief work to a much further point (he had in fact, so far back as 1824, written on the period from Augustus to Aurelian, which he declared he would not give up to anyone), or, better still, have written a history of Hellas, to which his sympathies were, most of all, attracted. But, in his inaugural lecture, he laid out the ground, in accordance with the accepted notion of the work of his chair, plainly and unostentatiously, and, in his first brief course, essayed a survey of the advancement of civilisation in England, more or less analogous to what Guizot, not long before, had achieved for France. 1 The concluding part of Arnold's History of Rome (The Second Punic War) was edited, with notes (1886), by his grandson William Thomas Arnold, who had already made a name for himself among our younger historians by his Roman Systen of Provincial Administration, published in 1879-81, and since twice re-issued. 2 Life and Correspondence, vol. II, p. 246.xiv] Merivale's Romans under the Empire 305 Arnold's judgment of Niebuhr as a historian of Rome, passed, as has been seen, from partial doubt into full acceptance; and it was not till 1855 that, in Sir George Cornewall Lewis's Credibility of Early Roman History, the conclusions adopted by Arnold were subjected to a searching analysis, in the light both of their genesis and of the comments which they had called forth. But this master of argument did not himself advance to constructive history. The history of Rome, from nearly the point which Arnold had reached, was carried on by a Cambridge scholar who was a sincere admirer of his and a liberal theologian, although, in general, conservative in his tendencies and tastes. Charles Merivale could, in his old age, from his fair deanery at Ely, look back with satisfaction on a life in which he had achieved everything that his father would have wished him to achieve and would, in the son's modest opinion, have himself achieved with superior distinction. The elder son, Herman, gained a high reputation by his writings, more especially on colonial and Indian subjects, and by his services in the colonial and the India offices'. Charles seemed at one time likely to be chiefly renowned for pure scholarship-as it was, he had few equals in Latin verse composition, of which he was, through life, an enthusiastic practitioner2. But a visit to Rome in 1845, when he is found taking careful notes of the impression made on him by the imperial portrait-busts, seems to have finally confirmed in him the idea of writing a history of Rome from the Social war to Constantine, and thus bridging, as it were, the interval between Arnold (Niebuhr) and Gibbon. By the close of 1846, he had nearly completed the first volume. In 1848, he accepted the rectory of Lawford near Manningtree in Essex; and here-in the quiet Constable country-he finally matured the scheme of his magnum opus; benefiting much by the counsel of his old college friend, William Bodham Donne, a fine scholar and sound critic3. The first volume of The History of the Romans under the Empire was published in 1850, and the last in 1864. The first three volumes were so successful that, after in vain seeking to secure feminine aid to this end, he epitomised them under the title The Fall of the Roman Republic (1853). A better book of the kind, sober 1 See bibliography in a later volume. 2 He published, in 1863, a Latin version of Keats's Hyperion. 3 Donne, the schoolfellow and friend of Edward FitzGerald, and, in turn, librarian of the London Library and deputy examiner of plays, wrote not a little, including Essays on the Drama, worthy of preservation.

E. L. XII. CH. XIV.

20306

Iistorians

[CH.

and stimulating at the same time, never blessed a generation of schoolmasters and schoolboys, no longer satisfied with Keightley and only on the eve of a flow of 'up to date' students' manuals. Merivale afterwards brought out a short General History of Rome (1875), besides subsidiary contributions to the history of the empire. The most interesting of these, as taking wide views of a great historical problem which famous predecessors had treated after their own fashion, is to be found in the companion Boyle lectures, The Conversion of the Roman Empire (1864) and The Conversion of the Northern Nations (1866). Merivale's chief book, if it does not quite bear out the comparisons which gratified the author in his old age, is a history of high merit and enduring value, composed in a style of simple dignity and dealing, in a spirit of both candour and justice, with the many difficult moral as well as intellectual problems which, in its course from Tiberius and, indeed, from Tacitus himself, downwards, call for solution. The narrative is based on an intimate knowledge of contemporary literature. Merivale, to begin with, was a close student of Cicero, whose Life and Letters by Abeken he translated into English (1854); before this, he had edited Sallust (1852); and he was not less familiar with Tacitus and Suetonius than he was with his beloved Lucan and Statius. Thus, his History was as free from pragmatic dryness and preconceived onesidedness as it was from mere fine writing, which his reserved and rather humourous nature abhorred. On the other hand, he was lacking in complete command of the primary sources of Roman history and had only partially investigated the unwritten remains of Roman life and its surroundings. He was pre-Mommsen in his unavoidable neglect of epigraphic material, and could not, in most cases, bring to bear upon his theme the observation of a traveller. While, in these respects, he still belonged to an older school of historians, he shared with the newer their freer outlook upon men and things, and the singleminded pursuit of truth by the application of the critical method. He is no more 'without bias' than is Niebuhr or Arnold, or any historian whose mind is merged in his work; but the point of view from which he favours monarchical government is a different one from Mommsen's. It may, perhaps, be added that Merivale's Cambridge life had gone some way towards teaching him the advantages of a knowledge of men as well as of things-though his fellow Saturday reviewers he had, for the most part, only known, when there, de hanut en bas: no doubt, the correct 'apostolic'xiv] George Long. Thirwall and Grote 307 attitude-and that, in his later days, when, as chaplain to the Speaker, he regularly watched the House of Commons and its vicissitudes, he found that he had gone through a good preliminary training in his study of Roman public character and life1. An authoritative position among English historians of ancient Rome was long held by George Long's Decline of the Roman Republic (1864-74), of which the first volume appeared in the same year as the last of Merivale's principal work. Long was one of the most productive classical scholars of his day, and one of the most trustworthy teachers of general history: besides a long series of volumes of Charles Knight's Penny Cyclopaedia, published by the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge2, he edited the seven volumes of its Biographical Dictionary, which, although-or, perhaps, because-they covered only the letter A, remained the one precursor deserving the name of the later Dictionary of National Biography. Long's qualifications as a historian were not limited to indefatigable industry: he wrote with lucidity and judgment, and he had in him a strain of high philosophic morality such as became the translator of Marcus Aurelius. The influence of the new school of historical criticism, as well as that of the great personality of Niebuhr, is conspicuous in both the English historians of Greece who adorned this age of our literature3. Their labours were almost simultaneous-for Grote's first two volumes appeared in 1845-rather more than a year after the publication of the last of Thirlwall's; and, of Grote, we know that he had been actively engaged upon the chief literary work of his life for more than twenty years. Although the pair were schoolfellows, their lives had lain in very different spheres of mental exertion-college and city; and they long remained quite unaware of their common devotion to the same subject of special study. It is all the more to Thirlwall's honour that, from the first, he should have welcomed so formidable a competitor; while Grote declared that, had Thirlwall's book appeared two or three years sooner, he would have abandoned his own design. In much the same spirit, some of the best qualified of judges1 See the clear and shrewd judgments in the letters printed in conjunction with Merivale's admirable Autobiography, which, unfortunately, extends only to 1880. 2 Some reference to Charles Knight's historical publications, the importance of which for the spread of historical knowledge in wide circles should not be underestimated, will be found in the bibliography to a later chapter. 3 Thirlwall's share in the translation of Niebuhr has been already mentioned. Grote wrote of Niebuhr in The Westminster Review (1843): his' moral nature was distinguished not only by a fearless love of truth, but by a quality yet more remarkable among literary men-a hearty sympathy with the mass of the people.' 20-2308

Historians

[CH.

E. A. Freeman1 above all-compared and contrasted the two great English historians of ancient Greece. Freeman, no doubt, is right in saying that, notwithstanding its relative conciseness, and the absence of the large excursive element to be found in Grote's book, Thirlwall's is primarily that of a scholar rather than of a man of affairs, and is free from all political passion-generally, to all appearance, even from political preferences. This unlikeness is, of course, partly due to the different genesis of the two works: Grote's was the execution of a great design, gradually but consciously formed, and harmonising with the writer's ideals of public life; Thirlwall's, originally intended for a contribution to Lardner's Cyclopaedia, was at first undertaken as little more than a 7rapepyov, and, in its earlier age, inspired by no more ardent ambition than that of 'leaving the history of Greece in some respects in a better condition than I found it.' Connop Thirlwall, whose literary life had begun with the publication, over his infant head, of a volume of his precocious primitiae in prose and verse, had early come to the conclusion that history and biography are 'the basis of polite literature'; but his linguistic gifts were always quite extraordinary2, and brought him into early contact with many branches of learning. A version by him of Schleiermacher's essay on St Luke preceded his translation of Niebuhr, with Julius Hare. In 1831, the two Trinity fellows jointly founded the short-livedPhilological Museum, in which appeared Thirlwall's masterly essay 'On the Irony of Sophocles,' which, of itself, would suffice to prove him a critic of rare perceptive power. Before settling down into the country living which gave him the necessary leisure for writing the History of Greece, he had been, very effectively, engaged in academic controversy and shown that, when he chose, he could wield a trenchant pen. His History-for of the wise ecclesiastical statesmanship and immovable sense of duty which marked his episcopal life nothing can be said here-was worthy of a fully furnished mind and of a self-controlled character. The progress of the narrative sustains the reader's interest by a style which holds him easily and naturally; as it happens, while the opening of the work is not its most remarkable portion (for 1 See his Historical Essays, 2nd ser. (1873), chapter xv, ' The Athenian Democracy' et al. 2 After his appointment to the see of St David's, he, in six months, mastered Welsh sufficiently to be able to preach in that tongue; and, when blindness came upon him at the last, he employed his leisure in rendering passages dictated to him into Latin, Greek, German, Italian, Spanish, French and Welsh.xiv]

Thirlwall and Grote

309

ethnological research is not held to have been Thirlwall's strongest point), the later volumes, especially those which treat of the struggle with Macedon and the conquests of Alexander the Great, are, in some respects, more successful than the corresponding portions of Grote's narrative. Although his habit of mind was critical, the author of Letters to a Friend was not without tenderness of soul; and it would be strange if one of the noblest among the qualities that distinguished him in life-a consistent hatred of injusticewere not found reflected in his History. Yet, at times, in his desire to be fair, he places a curious restraint upon himself, as in his account of the death of Socrates, following on a more than adequate tribute to the patriotism of Aristophanes. Thirlwall, though he cannot be said to have been superseded by Grote, must, if the highest standard is impartially applied to the whole historical achievements of both, be allowed to be surpassed by him. Grote's is, or used to be, not unfrequently cited as a signal example of the historical work which has been produced in England without the training of the academical specialist and which thus conspicuously exhibits the vivifying effects of a direct contact with public life and a knowledge of the world, with its interests and motives of action. Apart, however, from the fact that, in Grote's younger days, at the English universities, such men as Arnold and Thirlwall had, virtually, to strike out for themselves the path of critical historical studies, it should be remembered that his own training was full and protracted as a student of both moral and mental philosophy in general, and of those of its branches, in particular, which are intimately connected with the philosophy of history. This training was carried on, partly as a discipline of private enquiry and study, and partly under the influence of the school or party of which Bentham was the founder or 'spiritual father,' and of which James Mill was the indefatigable prophet. Grote, therefore, like those Athenian followers of wisdom in hall or garden with whom his mind loved to dwell, cherished in himself those instincts of academic life which have little to do with degree courses and examinations, and, both in the early days of the new university of London and during his later official connection with University college, showed the warmest interest in the advancement of higher studies1. 1 See Croom Robertson's notice of Grote in the Dictionary of National Biography, vol. xxIi (1890). This should be read with Mrs Grote's Personal Life of George Grote, which shows how deeply the creative energy of Grote was indebted to his wife's sympathetic devotion.310

Historians

[CH.

To the arduous service exacted from Grote in his early manhood by the important banking-house with which he was connected by birth was added a political activity extending from 1820, when he came forward with a temperate Statement of the Question of Parliamentary Reform in response to an Edinburgh article by Sir James Mackintosh, to his final retirement from parliament in 1842. He had been elected for the City at the end of 1831, having, at the beginning of the year, in a second pamphlet, The Essentials of Parliamentary Reform, re-stated those political principles to which he consistently adhered, and which included the advocacy of secret and frequent elections. But, so early as 1823, he had been so deeply interested in the study of Greek history that his wife's suggestion, 'Suppose you try your hand,' instantly caught fire; and, from this time forward, he engaged in the collection of notes and extracts towards that end. In April 1826, in an article, a review of Clinton's Fasti Hellenici', in The Westminster Review, of which the editor, Dr (afterwards Sir James) Bowring, recognised the unusual value, Grote had taken occasion to examine at length the claims of Mitford's History of Greece to the reputation which it still enjoyed and which was fervently upheld by Clinton, and to predict that, should Greek history 'ever be rewritten with care and fidelity, these claims would be prodigiously lowered.' Business and politics alike long prevented him from devoting the necessary time to his great historical project; but, when, with the requisite leisure, the day of fulfilment came at last, it did not find him unprepared. Niebuhr's influence upon Grote2, and his intimacy with Sir George Cornewall Lewis, alike led him to enter with very great interest into the earliest section of the work before him; and March 1845 1 As to Mitford's History of Greece (1785-1810), cf. ante, vol. x, p. 320. Grote's strictures on the work are unsparing and, while pronouncing Mitford's treatment of his authorities as unsatisfactory, directly condemn the political tendency manifested without disguise or mitigation in the whole of it, more especially in the portions written after the French revolution. Henry Fynes Clinton's Fasti Hellenici: the Civil and Literary Chronology of Greece appeared in 1824-30, and were succeeded, in 1850-1, by Fasti Romani: the Civil and Literary Chronology of Rome and Constantinople. After passing from parliamentary into literary life, he devoted an enormous amount of time to his chronological labours. He seems to have been wholly incapable of doubt with regard to facts and figures as recorded on the written page, and, notwithstanding his extraordinary industry and accuracy as a recorder, must be viewed as a rather belated example of the pre-critical age of ancient history studies. 2 In 1843 there appeared in The Westminster Review (vol. xxxix) an article by Grote on Niebuhr's Griechische Heroengeschichten (1842) which treats with much acumen both the question of the origin of myths and the Homeric poems in particular.xiv] Grote's History and other IforAs 3 I at last saw the publication of the first two volumes of the History of Greece. Although this instalment of the work was occupied with the legendary rather than the properly historical part of its subject, the high merit of these volumes, and the thoroughness with which they applied the critical method to Hellenic mythology, ensured to them an immediate success; Hallam, though far more conservative as a critic than Cornewall Lewis, with whom he joined in according a warm welcome to Grote's production, declared that he had never known a book take so rapid a flight to the highest summit. Although the earliest portion of the work is, perhaps, in some respects, less conclusive than the body of the historical narrative that follows, it bears upon it, like the rest, the stamp of both independence and freedom of judgment. The review of the Homeric problem, following on the general survey of Greek mythology, specially exemplifies these qualities and offers a good test of Grote's powers as a critical scholar. The remaining volumes appeared in a fairly regular and quick sequence; the circumstance that the twelfth and last volume, published in 1856, was three years behind the eleventh being due partly to the labour entailed by the revision of the previous volumes for later editions, partly, perhaps, to uncertainty in the author's mind as to the ultimate limits of the work. During its progress, it absorbed his literary labours almost entirely; in 1847, however, when on the eve of giving to the world its most vital portion, the review of the history of the great Athenian democracy, he spared time to put on paper his views as to the progress of the earliest of the series of revolutionary movements in mid-nineteenth century Europe, the conflict between the Swiss confederation and the Sanderbundi, As the historian of Greece drew nearer to the close of his work, he finally made up his mind to reserve for fuller treatment in a separate book the philosophy which he expounded in Plato and the Companions of Sokrates (1865); but he did not, as he had at first intended, proceed to a complete examination of the philosophy of Aristotle2. His historical work proper had come to an end some time before his death. Yet, he may be esteemed happy in that he ended his intellectual life 1 Grote's Seven Letters on the Recent Politics of Switzerland were the product of a visit to that country in the late summer of 1S47. His sympathies, of course, were with the liberal cantons; but the Letters showed discrimination as to the faults on both sides, and gained the approval of a very clear-sighted judge of contemporary politics, queen Victoria's consort prince Albert. 2 See bibliography.312

Hzstorians

[CH.

where he had begun it; for, if other great historians have reared their historical works on the substratum of philological, legal or other studies, with him it was 'divine philosophy' which had suggested the ideals that were before him in his narrative of Greek, or, perhaps, it might better be said of Attic, life and thought. He died on 18 June 1871. He had refused Gladstone's offer of a peerage; but he was buried in Westminster abbey, and a bust of him was erected there. Of the criticisms to which Grote's great work, as a whole, has been subjected, two seem specially deserving of notice, since, at the same time, they point to characteristics from which it derives much of its value, and not a little of the power of attraction which it exercises. For, notwithstanding its undeniable longueurs, and a certain formlessness, due to the contempt for the artifices of composition and style observable in Grote as in nearly all the members of the philosophical school which he followed, the History has a fascination of its own from which few will escape who read consecutively at least the last ten volumes. Grote's work-with the exception, if it be such, of its first two volumesis, practically, political. Herein lies at once its strength and its limitation. The investigation of the origines of Hellenic national life (partly, no doubt, in consequence of the condition, in his younger days, of philological and ethnological science) hardly entered into the range of his closer studies; while it would have been equally out of keeping alike with his natural gifts and with the unimaginative atmosphere in which his own intellectual powers had ripened that he should have been able to give colour and glow to his picture of Periclean Athens, albeit the very centre of his entire History. As to the former restriction, apart from the drawbacks chargeable on the period of learning to which he belonged, it is much to his credit that, in discussing ethnological problems, he should not have surrendered his judgment even to the authority to whose guidance he was under the greatest obligation, as in the case of K. 0. Miiller and his Dorians. In the matter of pure scholarship, Grote had to undergo (and could afford to undergo) attacks like those of Richard Shilleto. But there was some force in the broader-minded criticism that, in his attention to political problems and the phenomena of the working out of these, he neglected social and economic conditions. And, since the history of the Athenian democracy was, to him, the very heart and kernel of the history of Greece, it must be allowed that this way of looking at his subject causes a certain impressionxiv] Grote and the History of Afthens 313 of incompleteness in his great work, although, of course, inasmuch as a history is not a handbook, he was wholly within his rights in determining what ground that work should cover. At the same time, it is difficult not to think that Grote's republican instincts, to which we owe his sympathetic account of Epaminondas, prejudiced his general view of the Macedonian period, and of Alexander the Great in particular, if it did not, as Merivale paradoxically put it, cause him to break off his story just where 'it became interesting'.' But in what, as has been hinted, may be regarded as the main thread in the woof of his fabric, in the history of Athens and of her constitution, and of its influence upon the destinies and the achievements of the Athenian people, Grote accomplished a icritfa e' cdel, which communicated its qualities to the whole of his historic work, and which, whatever exceptions may be taken to some of the details of the narrative, remains, and probably always will remain, without a parallel. The age of political reform, or of aspirations for reform, throughout Europe, and the mind of a reformer familiar with the struggle on behalf of high political inspirations, or reaching out for the realisation of ulterior ideals-these both live in Grote's volumes and give life to them. Athenian history had been miswritten from the days of Xenophon to those of Mitford; and the strength of a great writer, of whose nature political thought and political endeavour had come to form part, was required to redress the balance. Grote's love of liberty joined with his fundamental sense of justice in producing a sympathetic though candid relation of the progress of the Athenian constitution and of Athenian public life from Clisthenes to Pericles, in whom this progress reached its height; and nowhere does that sense of justice shine forth more conspicuously than in his temperate, though still sympathetic, narrative of the ensuing decline. He refuses to set down the sophists as agents in this decline, or to draw a contrast between them and Socrates, whom he shows to have been, though generously distinguished from them in some respects, yet essentially one of their body. Thus, he is neither daunted nor depressed by the view of earlier historians, but rather stimulated to opposition, though, even in opposition, he maintains his fairness and his self-control. On Grote's work was largely founded The History of Greece by George William Cox (who, in his later years, assumed the title of baronet), also known by the part taken by him in ecclesiastical 1 Cited by Gooch, History and Historians, etc, p. 318.'T 7 ~



314 Hzstorzans [CH. controversies, more especially in that concerning bishop Colenso, whose life he wrote. Cox was associated with Freeman in their early publication of Poems Legendary and Historical (1850), and afterwards gained a considerable reputation by a succession of popular historical volumes. Perhaps the most striking part of his History of Greece is to be found in its mythological chapters, where he followed Mlax Miiller's method of interpretation, which he carried to a great length in other books; as a whole, the History has not achieved a lasting reputation. The most notable contribution to the history of Greece since the appearance of Grote's work, which it can claim the honour of supplementing worthily, is George Finlay's History of Greece from its conquest by the Romans to the present time (146 B.C.-A.D. 1864). Such is its title in the collective Oxford edition, which includes the successive Histories of Greece under the Romans, of the Byzantine and Greek Empires and of Greece under Othoman and Venetian domination. The subject of this voluminous narrative, which, in part, was treated afresh in a separate work-the History of Greecefrom the Conquest by the Crusaders to that by the Turks, and of the Empire of Trebizond (the eastern provinces of the Byzantine empire)-was continued by the same indefatigable pen in a History of the Greek Revolution. In certain stages of the revolution, including Byron's difficult experiences at Mesolonghi, Finlay had in his early manhood taken some part. After the advent of Capodistrias as president of Greece under the protection of the great powers had at last seemed to offer the prospect of a settled condition to the heroic little country, he resolved to take up his abode there, hoping to 'aid in putting Greece into the road that leads to a rapid increase of production, population, and material improvement.' When, he adds in his brief autobiography, he had wasted as much money as he possessed, he 'turned his attention to study, and planned writing a true history of the Greek Revolution in such a way as to exhibit the condition of the people' and to be of real use to future generations. Thus, his work, like certain other celebrated histories, but after a fashion of its own, and on the primary basis of actual dearly-bought experience, went back from the near to the remoter past; but, however embittering may have been the disappointment with which this single-minded and noble-hearted student looked back upon his literary labours as well as upon his experiences as a landowner, he would not allow these feelings to narrow his horizon or to depress his historical standpoint,xIv] Freeman's Federal Government 315 although he took into consideration the social, as well as the political, side of his subject. His History begins with a tribute to the effects of the conquests of Alexander the Great, highly valued by Freeman (to whom, it may be observed, Finlay's reputation as a historian was not a little indebted); and the students, now many and distinguished, of the history of that Byzantine empire which, as Freeman says, may claim Alexander as its founder, will not refuse to recognise in Finlay a pioneer among those who have essayed the continuous, as well as the exact, treatment of an all but incomparable theme. In his later years, Finlay, whose entire work stretches over more than two thousand years, engaged largely in journalism, without, however, at any time abandoning the main interest of his life's work. Unfortunately, his letters from Greece, of which the most important were addressed to The Times from 1864 to 1870, have never been collected in his native country; or they would form a characteristic, though depressing, epilogue to the story of the great decline and fall, followed by a truncated risorgimento, which he made it the chief business of his later life to unfold. Although, as will be shown in a subsequent chapter, many English scholars and antiquaries have, by their researches and criticisms, rendered great services to the study of ancient history, and strengthened its foundations while widening and diversifying its scope, the historians who have more particularly devoted themselves to this field of labour have not been numerous. This may partly be due to a narrowing of the field, by fencing off the prehistoric section, and leaving it mainly, though not exclusively, in the first instance, to the archaeologist; partly, it is accounted for by the preponderating attention given, in the second and third quarters of the century, to medieval historical research and investigation, largely because of the popularity of the romanticists in our literature. By the side of the names already mentioned, that of Edward Augustus Freeman would have been more conspicuous than it is had not-primarily through his love of architecture-these medieval influences long sought to claim him as their own. His work as a historian will thus, as a whole, be more appropriately estimated in a later volume. But, in the first and only published volume of his History of Federal Government (1861), written when he was at the very height of his productivity, and intended as but the first instalment of a work comprising, also, the history of federalism in medieval and modern times (inclusive of the Swiss and German leagues, the United Provinces316

Historians

[CH.

of the Netherlands and the United States of America), he produced a memorable work on a notable subject of ancient history. He was careful to insist on his proper theme being, not the history, or even the military history, of a period, but the history of an idea in its actual development. In the same spirit, he abstained from identifying himself, like other historians, great or not, of Greece, with party or faction; with the result that few, if any, of his books are so instructive as this, the beginning of what might have proved one of the most important of constitutional histories. Among Freeman's Historical Essays, those of the second series (published in 1873), devoted to ancient history, have 4 freshness and, so to speak, an ease of manner which mark them out among his contributions to periodicals. Finally, his History of Sicily (1891-4), almost uniquely fitted as the theme was for illustrating his favourite dogma of the unity of historyl, offered him an opportunity of returning to his Greek studies. He carried on the work, though not completely, to the death of Agathocles (300 B.c.), and the fourth volume was piously edited by his son-in-law (Sir) Arthur Evans. From this point, it was to have proceeded to the Roman, and thence to the Norman, conquest of Sicily, so that Roger was to take his place by the side of Gelon. This fragment in four volumes, owing not a little to the stimulating influence of personal observation, is one of the most enjoyable of Freeman's books, and will survive by the side of works which have treated the subject of ancient Sicily with greater completeness and with more marked attention to its singularly attractive literary side. Although Freeman's History of Sicily throws much light on the history of Carthage, the later centre of Phoenician life, it was no part of his plan to essay a narrative of the whole of her fortunes-a task which, on a scale befitting its importance, still remains unperformed3. The history of Phoenicia as a whole, however, was included in the vast field of the labours of George Rawlinson, brother of Sir Henry Rawlinson, whose memoir he '1 In Sicily at least,' he writes, ' there is no room for an " ancient" school and a "modern ".' 2 Freeman repeatedly visited Sicily; so that, as he says, many of the places of which he speaks in this work were as familiar to him as his own house; on the other hand, he found it very difficult to discuss new facts in his reading as he had done when writing his History of the Norman Conquest. 3 Among later English writers, Reginald Bosworth Smith (better known as the biographer of Lord Lawrence) has made it the subject of a useful monograph (1878), which was able to take advantage of the rather loosely recorded researches of N. Davis.xiv] George Rawlinson. Sir V. Smith 317 wrote, and whose logical discoveries find mention in a later chapter. Canon Rawlinson, who had long taken an active part in Oxford administrative work, was, by his appointment to the Camden professorship of history in the university, enabled to devote himself more exclusively to historical research; but, already in the previous year, The History of Herodotus (1858 -60) was completed, in which a new English version was accompanied by a large apparatus of historical and ethnological notes, based, to a great extent, on the cuneiform and hieroglyphic discoveries of Sir Henry Rawlinson and Sir J. Gardner Wilson. During his occupation of his chair, George Rawlinson published a succession of histories designed to bring home to the public the general, as well as the particular, importance of recent discoveries and researches in the near east for the history of the ancient world. His deeply-rooted conservatism, which displayed itself both in his contributions to biblical and other theological works and in his share in the religious controversies of his day also asserted itself in his historical productions. But it was of service to him, in the gradual execution of a great design, which sought to cover, in turn, the history, geography and antiquities of the seven great oriental monarchies, as well as of Egypt and Phoenicia, by leading him to avoid rashness and crudity of conjecture, and, in the earlier of his volumes in particular, to build up foundations likely to be of use to future historiansl. Works on the history of Greek and Latin literature, inclusive of writings where historical narrative and biography are welded into an organic whole with literary criticism, must be left for notice elsewhere. There, notice will, also, be taken, among Sir William Smith's invaluable aids to classical study, of his Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography (1844-9), which materially helped to advance the study of ancient history on critical lines, and that of Greek and Roman Geography, which dealt with an indispensable adjunct to, or, rather, an integral part of, that study (1854-7). His Dictionary of the Bible was published in 1863; that of Christian Biography, in which Wace was his coadjutor, from 1877 to 1887. Henry Hart Milman's History of Latin Christianity, and, indeed, the whole of his course as a historical writer, connect 1 Henry Francis Pelham, canon Rawlinson's successor as Camden professor, was prevented by temporary loss of eyesight as well as by other causes from completing more than a fragment of the History of the Roman Empire projected by him; and nothing but this, together with a volume of Outlines of Roman History and a number of essays and articles in the same field, remains to attest his unusual powers, though he did much to advance historical research in and beyond his university.3 8

Historians

[CH.

themselves so closely with the beginnings of critical history in England, already illustrated in the present chapter from the works of Arnold, Thirlwall and Grote, that it seems most appropriate to speak of him here, together with one or two other writers whose works, in part, cover the same ground as his. The earliest work with which this rarely accomplished man of letters and courageous, though at no time other than reverent, thinker came forward as a historical writer was The History of the Jews (1839). The 'poet-priest,' as Byron called him, was already conspicuous among the poetic dramatists of his generation, as he was among the writers of hymns; and he had very appropriately filled the chair of poetry at Oxford'. The History of the Jews had, originally, been written for The Family Library, and, notwithstanding the candour of whatever came from its author's hand, gave some indications of the reserve befitting sober treatment of its subject2. Nevertheless, the book made its mark, in the words of a wakeful observer, as the first decisive inroad of German theology into England, the first palpable indication that the Bible can be studied like another book; that the characters and events of the sacred history could be treated at once critically and reverently. Even Arnold (whose personal feelings as to the Jews could hardly have entered into the matter) was not altogether comfortable. But Milman, in whose moral texture there was a strand of uncommon courage, was not dismayed, and, instead of accommodating the further work which he had in preparation to the requirements of the series in which The History of the Jews had appeared, prepared himself for its execution on a wider basis, while, at the same time, collecting materials for an annotated edition of The Decline and Fall. This was published in 1839, accompanied by a life of Gibbon and selections from his correspondence, and, enlarged and revised in a later edition with the cooperation of other eminent historical scholars, held its own till, in our day, it has been superseded in an edition embodying the results of more recent research. The History of Christianity from the Birth of Christ to the Abolition of Paganism in the Roman Empire was itself not published till 1840, and was followed in 1854-5, by the author's magnum opus, The History 1 While holding it, he produced translations from Sanskrit poetry. At a later date, he published an edition of Horace, and versions of Agamemnon and Bacchae. 2 Grote, in The Westminster Review (vol. xxxix, 1843), spoke of it as 'written in a perfectly religious spirit, but exhibiting some disposition to economise the supernatural energy.'XIV]

Mi/man's Latin Christianity

3r9

of Latin Christianity, including that of the Popes to Nicolas V. This work raised the reputation of Milman as a historian to a high pinnacle. Froude (who had reasons for knowing Milman's magnanimity) spoke of it as 'the first historical work in the English language'; and A. P. Stanley described his future brother-dean's achievement as 'in fact, a complete epic and philosophy of medieval literature.' Such praise seems too high; for, while Milman's book proves him capable of viewing a great subject both in its historical proportions and in its inner coherence, and of dealing with its main features and, indeed, with its main problems in a large spirit of comprehension and of insight into both men and institutions, it is lacking in certain other qualities. Of these, in view of Milman's previous literary record, it would not be easy to explain the absence, if such deficiencies always admitted of explanation. In a word, Milman, in his History, seems to be without the imaginative force of his great predecessor, which, in Gibbon, reflected itself in the mirror of a truly grand style, such as, perhaps, no other subject could have so appropriately sustained. On the other hand, no commendations could be more just than those which, so long as the book continues to be read, will continue to be bestowed on its breadth and generosity of judgment-the qualities of which ecclesiastical history frequently stands in need, but with which the writers of it are too often insufficiently endowed. It was the possession of these gifts which led no less competent a judge than Milman's later successor at St Paul's, dean Church, to express the wish that Milman should undertake a history of the reformation-a subject perhaps less august than that chosen by him, but one with which no man dwelling between Rome and the remote regions of Britain could have been more safely trusted than Milman to treat loftily, perspicuously, fearlessly, justly. The verdict of the world-the clerical world in especial-was, at first, less favourable, or, at all events, less articulate. But, in 1849, Lord Russell (he, too, not wanting in courage) promoted Milman from the Westminster canonry held by him together with the rectory of St Margaret's to the deanery of St Paul's, where he acquitted himself of the duties of his office admirably. At the time of his death (24 September 1868), his Annals of St Paul's was passing through the press: in his later years, he had written a memorial notice of Macaulay (for the Royal society), besides historical essays of value, which, likewise, were published posthumously. His chief work will maintain its place, because of the320

Historians

[CH.

great mass of material which, with equal judgment and sincerity, he has compressed within its limits, and because of the openmindedness and magnanimity which are even rarer in the historians of great periods and problems than is the constructive ability requisite for their comprehensive treatment. It is difficult to speak of the eminent historian whose name stands forth even on the illustrious roll of the deans of St Paul's without also recalling the brilliant writer and single-minded champion of religious toleration who, during the last five years of Milman's life, held the deanery of the sister cathedral, commemorated by him, in his turn, in a monograph testifying, at least, to his desire to identify himself with the great minster committed to his charge. Arthur Penrhyn Stanley, though neither a great historian nor a profound theologian, deserves to be remembered in the annals of English literature as well as in those of English public life, primarily in its religious and educational aspects. His Life of Arnold (1844) is one of those biographies which will never lose their value; for, although it cannot claim to be one of the masterpieces of national biography, inasmuch as it fails to give anything like a complete account either of the man or of his work, it possesses that kind of unity and force which spring from an absolute projection of the author into his narrative, which glows with the noble enthusiasm of a faithful disciple. Stanley's whole nature was pervaded by the influence of Arnold, and, though the master's simple, and, indeed, severe, manliness never could and never can appropriately be made the object of a cult, the example of his biographer, whose geniality and tolerance were gifts of his own, proves how potent and enduring was that influence, which had been 'the lodestar of his early life.' This it is which makes the book, though, apart from the letters, far less rich than many other biographies in illustrative detail, singularly attractive, and does away with Stanley's fears that he might, by exaggeration of language, have done harm to the object of his reverence. Neither the outward circumstances of Stanley's career, which ran smoothly, as became that of the kindliest of men, with the most favourable of family connections, nor the greater part of his extraordinary activity as a preacher, lecturer and writer, must detain us here. Marked early for preferment, he found himself a canon of Canterbury in 1851-the year in which his exertions as an academical reformer had secured to him the secretaryship of the Oxford university commission; and, in the following year, he started on his memorable tour in Egypt and Palestine, inXIV]

Stanley's Lectures

321

attendance on the prince of Wales. His canonical residence bore literary fruit in his Memorials of Canterbury (1854)-four essays, in which that on the well-worn subject the murder of Becket attracted attention; and his eastern tour in his Sinai and Palestine, a historian's book of travel, any defects in which (and it met with censure in certain very high quarters) may be forgiven in consideration of the force with which it brings home to the reader the associations, sacred and other, of the land it describes. This labour of love, generously furthered by aid not less generously acknowledged, was, like the biography with which his literary life had begun, entirely congenial to him. Its success, no doubt, helped to bring about his appointment as professor of ecclesiastical history at Oxford (1861). His first course of professorial lectures, dealing with the eastern church, attracted attention by the oriental character-portraits introduced into the account of the council of Nicaea, and by other passages. Then followed two series of lectures on the history of the Jewish church (from Abraham to Samuel, and thence to the fall of Jerusalem), of which his insight into historical character again forms a most attractive feature; for the time had passed when, as in Milman's earlier days, worthy people 'were shocked at hearing Abraham called a sheikh/' At least equally striking in these lectures was the freedom of critical enquiry which they displayed, though the remark that 'what Niebuhr was to Arnold, Ewald was to Stanley' may, perhaps, err on the side of overstatement. In 1872 came out Lectures on the Church of Scotland, delivered at Edinburgh; to Memorials of Westminster Abbey (1867) reference has already been made. The book was criticised, with some severity, by Freeman, whose review was, at first, attributed to Green; on the other side may be remembered, as a notable tribute to the encouragement derived from Stanley by many students, that Green was not only impelled to historical work by Stanley's Oxford lectures, but declared that it was from these that he first learned the principle of fairness. Stanley's successor in his Oxford chair, William Bright, will be remembered, if only for his extraordinary industry in the amassing of materials, which he arranged with so much lucidity that his History of the Church, A.D. 315-451 (1860) has been accepted as a standard manual for theological students. Although this book was composed for the special purpose it has fulfilled, and is unfrequently illuminated by sayings so fine as that concerning Constantine the Great, who, 'while he gave much to his religion, did not give himself,' the author writes with a suppressed, but, at E. L. XII. CH. XIV. 21322

Historians

[CH. XIV

times, caustic, zeal that appears to have been one of his characteristics. His Chapters of Early English Church History (1878), though full of learning, are less attractive. He was, also, a hymnwriter of much power. From a different point of view than that of Milman, and with an amplitude of detail such as would hardly have commended itself to the historian of later Christianity, or even to him of The Decline and Fall itself, Thomas Hodgkin undertook the task of supplementing the vast enterprise of Gibbon, where it undoubtedly fell short of the historical learning of the present age. Having, like Grote, been trained in the responsibilities of the higher spheres of business, it was not till a relatively advanced stage of his life that Hodgkin first came before the historical public in an attempt to introduce to wider circles the letters of the chief extant authority on Roman life under Gothic dominion, the great Theodoric's circumspect minister Cassiodorus (1886), whose works have found a notable editor in Mommsen. After this, during nearly twoscore years (while some of his earlier publications marked the gradual advance of his labours) he carried out the task which he had set himself, and which covered the entire period from the partition of the Roman empire between Valens and Valentinian to the death of Charles the Great. The eight volumes entitled Italy and her Invaders were complete in 1899. During the execution of this great undertaking his enthusiasm had never deserted him, either in the main course of his narrative or the many side-paths into which his unflagging desire for knowledge diverted his researches, aided by his experiences as a traveller. He was an accomplished archaeologist and a most attractive historical topographer, who had thus good reason for the sympathy which he felt with the genius of Ernst Curtius. His personal preferences, nevertheless, inclined to the medieval type of historical writing, and he was at least a chronicler, something after the manner of Barante, rather than a critical historian, and loved to reproduce at length the flow of the sources of which his learning had enabled him to appreciate the value. Thus, his narrative was wont to run into a lengthiness which was not altogether redeemed by the general charm of his style. Hodgkin, besides publishing some shorter pieces, contributed to The Political History of England a well-written volume on the period before the Norman conquest and composed an interesting monograph on the founder of the religious body to which he belonged and with whose spirit of humankindness he was signally imbued.CHAPTER XV

SCHOLARS, ANTIQUARIES AND BIBLIOGRAPHERS CLASSICAL SCHOLARS EARLY in the nineteenth century the most notable name in the world of classical scholarship was that of Richard Porson. A son of the parish clerk at East Ruston, near North Walsham, in Norfolk, he was born in 1759, and gave early proof of remarkable powers of memory. Thanks to the liberality of his friends, his education, begun in the neighbourhood of his birthplace, was completed at Eton and at Trinity college, Cambridge. He was elected Craven scholar in 1781, and first chancellor's medallist and fellow of Trinity in 1782. Ten years later, he lost his fellowship, solely because of his resolve to remain a layman; but, once more, his friends raised a fund which provided him with an annual income of ~100, and, in the same year, he was unanimously elected regius professor of Greek, the stipend at that time being only ~40. He lived mainly in London, where his society was much sought by men of letters. In November 1796, he married the sister of James Perry, editor of The Mornin.g Chronicle, but he lost his wife in the following April. In 1806 he was appointed librarian of the London Institution, with a salary of ~200 a year; and, in 1808, he died. He was buried in the ante-chapel of his college. In the same building is his bust by Chantry. His portrait by Kirkby is in the dining-room of Trinity lodge; that by Hoppner, which has been engraved by Sharpe and by Adlard, is in the university library. The first work that made him widely known was his Letters to Travis in 1788-9. Archdeacon Travis, in his Letters to Gibbon, had maintained the genuineness of the text as to the 'three that bear record in heaven' (1 St John v 7). Porson gave ample proof of its spuriousness, partly on the ground of its absence from, practically, all the Greek manuscripts. He thus supported an 21-2324

Greek Scholars

[CH.

opinion which had been held by critics from the days of Erasmus, and had recently been affirmed afresh by Gibbon', who regarded Porson's reply as 'the most acute and accurate piece of criticism since the days of Bentley.'2 This was immediately followed by Porson's preface and notes to a new edition of Toup's Emendations on Suidas (1790). It was by a copy of that critic's Longinus, presented to Porson in his boyhood by the headmaster of Eton, that the great Greek scholar had been first drawn to classical criticism. He also owed much to the influence of Bentley. 'When I was seventeen,' he once said, 'I thought I knew everything; as soon as I was twenty-four, and had read Bentley, I found I knew nothing.'3 He calls Bentley's work on Phalaris an 'immortal dissertation'4; he is said to have wept with delight when he found that his own emendations of the text of Aristophanes had been anticipated by Bentley, and the correctness of many of these emendations was confirmed by the subsequent collation of the famous manuscript at Ravenna5. In 1783 he had been invited by the syndics of the Cambridge university press to edit Aeschylus, but his offer to visit Florence with a view to collating the Laurentian manuscript was unfortunately rejected, the chairman of the syndics gravely suggesting that 'Mr Porson might collect his manuscripts at home.' The syndics had also unwisely insisted on an exact reprint of the old and corrupt text of Stanley's edition of 1663, and Porson naturally declined the task. Porson's partial revision of the text was printed by Foulis at Glasgow in 1794, but was not published until 1806; meanwhile, his corrections were surreptitiously incorporated in a folio edition, fifty-two copies of which were printed by the same firm in 1795; but in neither edition was there any mention of Porson's name. His masterly edition of four plays of Euripides began in 1797 with the Hecuba; it was continued in the Orestes (1798) and Phoenissae (1799), and in the Medea (1801), where the editor's name appears for the first time. It was from Porson's transcript of the Medea, still preserved in the library of his college, that the so-called 'Porson type' was cut for the university press. In the preface to his edition of the Hecuba, he settled certain points of Greek prosody in a sense contrary to that of Hermann's early 1 Decline and Fall, chap. xxxvII, notes 117-122. M2iscellaneous Works, vol. I, 159. 3 Luard, H. R., in Cambridge Essays, 1857, p. 169 n. 4 Note on Medea, 139 f. 6 Luard, I.c. p. 153. 6 David Murray's B. and A. Foulis, 1913, pp. 121 f.xv]

Porson

325

treatise on metres, but without complete proof. In 1800 Hermann produced a rival edition, attacking Porson's opinions; and, in 1802, Porson replied in a supplement appended to the preface of his second edition. This reply has justly been regarded by Jebb as 'his finest single piece of criticism.' He here lays down the law that determines the length of the fourth syllable from the end of the normal iambic or trochaic line, tacitly correcting Hermann's mistakes, but never mentioning his name. Porson spent at least ten months in transcribing in his own beautiful hand the Codex Galeanus of the lexicon of Photius; in 1796 the transcript was destroyed by fire in London; a second transcript was prepared by Porson and deposited in the library of his college, and finally published by Dobree in 1822, fourteen years after Porson's death. It is to be regretted that Porson failed to finish his edition of Euripides, and that he did not live to edit either Aristophanes or Athenaeus. He would doubtless have achieved far more, if the sobriety of his life had been equal to the honesty and truthfulness of his character. Parr, writing to Burney, said: 'He is not only a matchless scholar, but an honest, a very honest man'1; and Thomas Turton, the future bishop of Ely, in vindicating Porson's literary character against the attacks of an episcopal champion of an unscholarly archdeacon, declared that Porson 'had no superior' in 'the most pure and inflexible love of truth.'2 In the study of Attic Greek, Porson elucidated many points of idiom and usage, and established the laws of tragic metre. Bishop Blomfield, after speaking of Bentley and Dawes, says that 'Porson, a man greater than them all, added to the varied erudition and universal research of Valckenaer and Ruhnken, a nicety of ear and acquaintance with the laws of metre, which the former possessed but imperfectly, and the latter not at all.'3 Of himself he modestly said: 'I am quite satisfied if, three hundred years hence, it shall be said that one Porson lived towards the close of the eighteenth century, who did a good deal for the text of Euripides.'4 For Cambridge and for England, he became the creator of the ideal of finished and exact verbal scholarship, which prevailed for more than fifty years after his death. Among Porson's older contemporaries was Samuel Parr of 1 Parr's Memoirs, vol. vI, p. 403. 2 Crito Cantabrigiensis, A Vindication of the Literary Character of Prof. Porson, 1827, pp. 347 f. 3 The Edinburgh Review, vol. xvII, p. 382. 4 Rogers, Table Talk, Porsoniana, p. 334.326

Greek Scholars

[CH.

Harrow, and of Emmanuel and St John's, who was born twelve years before Porson, and survived him by seventeen. Headmaster of three schools in succession, he spent the last forty years of his life as perpetual curate and private tutor at Hatton, in Warwickshire. He attained considerable distinction as a writer of Latin prose, closely following Cicero and Quintilian in the long preface to his edition of a treatise on Cicero written about 1616 by Bellenden, and Morcelli in his stately epitaphs and other Latin inscriptions. Notwithstanding his extensive erudition, he accomplished little of permanent value; but he freely lavished his advice and his aid on others. Porson spent the winter of 1790-1 at Hatton, enriching his mind with the vast stores of Parr's library of more than 10,000 volumes. He was described by one who had surveyed all the literature associated with his life, as 'one of the kindest hearted and best read Englishmen' of his generation1; while Macaulay characterised his 'vast treasure of erudition' as 'too often buried in the earth, too often paraded with injudicious and inelegant ostentation, but still precious, massive, and splendid.' 2 Among the minor lights of the age was Gilbert Wakefield, fellow of Jesus college, Cambridge, whose passion for tampering with the text of the classics is exemplified in his editions of Horace, Virgil and Lucretius. His notes on Lucretius are disfigured by his attacking 'the most brilliant and certain emendations of Lambinus' 'with a vehemence of abuse that would be too great even for his own errors.'3 His Lucretius was completed in the same year as Porson's first edition of the Hecuba. Porson 'out of kindness' had forborne to mention certain conjectures on the text proposed by Wakefield; but his silence led to Wakefield's inditing a violent and hasty 'Diatribe' teeming with injudicious and intemperate criticism. In 1799 his treasonable expression of a hope that England would be invaded and conquered by the French led to his imprisonment for two years in Dorchester gaol. During his imprisonment he continued to correspond with Fox on points of scholarship, and, soon after his release, he died. Porson had a high opinion of his earlier contemporary, John Horne Tooke, of St John's college, Cambridge. His reputation rests on The Diversions of Purley (1786), which certainly excited a new interest in etymology, and had the merit of insisting on the importance of the study of Gothic and Old English. The date of its appearance also marks the birth of the science 1 Baker-Mayor, History of St John's College, vol. I, p. 540. 2 Essays, p. 642, ed. 1861. 3 Munro's Lucretius, vol. i, p. 19, ed. 1873.xv] Sir WFilliam Jones. ELmsley 327 of comparative philology. In that year Sir William Jones, who had passed from the study of English, Attic and Indian law to that of the Sanskrit language, made a memorable declaration: The Sanscrit tongue... is of a wonderful structure; more perfect than the Greek, more copious than the Latin, and more exquisitely refined than either, yet bearing to both of them a stronger affinity, both in the roots of verbs and in the forms of grammar, than could have been produced by accident; so strong that no philologer could examine the Sanscrit, Greek, and Latin, without believing them to have been sprung from some common source.... There is a similar reason... for supposing that both the Gothic and the Celtic had the same origin with the Sanscrit. The old Persian may be added to the same family1. Dr Parr, who died in 1825, writes thus in his diary: England, in my day, may boast of a Decad of literary luminaries, Dr Samuel Butler, Dr Edward Maltby, bishop Blomfield, dean Monk, Mr E. H. Barker, Mr Kidd, Mr Burges, professor Dobree, professor Gaisford, and Dr Elmsley. They are professed critics: but, in learning and taste, Dr Routh of Oxford is inferior to none. Martin Joseph Routh, who was born in 1755, died in 1854, in the hundredth year of his age, after holding the position of president of Magdalen for three and sixty years. In 1784 he edited the Euthydemus and Gorgias of Plato; he lived to produce the fifth volume of his Reliquiae Sacrae in 1848, and, at the age of seventy-two, summed up his long experience in the precept: 'I think, sir, you will find it a very good practice always to verify your references.' Edward Maltby, the pupil of Parr and the friend of Porson, received valuable aid from both in supplementing a useful lexicon of Greek prosody, founded on Morell's Thesaurus. Educated at Winchester, and at Pembroke college, Cambridge, he was successively bishop of Chichester and of Durham. The Porsonian tradition passed for a time from Cambridge to Oxford in the person of Peter Elmsley, of Winchester and of Christ Church, who was born in 1773 and died in 1825. At Florence, in 1820, he collated the Laurentian manuscript of Sophocles, and the earliest recognition of its excellence is to be found in the preface to his edition of the Oedipus Coloneus (1823). He also edited the Oedipus Tyrannus; and the Heraclidae, Medea and Bacchae of Euripides. As a scholar whose editorial labours were almost entirely confined to the Greek drama, he had a close affinity with Porson, who held him in high esteem, until he found him appropriating his emendations without mentioning his 1 Asiatic Researches, vol. I, p. 422 (1786).328

Greek Scholars

[CH.

name. In all his editions, Elmsley devoted himself mainly to the illustration of the meaning of the text, and to the elucidation of the niceties of Attic idiom. He had also a wide knowledge of history, and, for the last two years of his life, was Camden professor of ancient history at Oxford. Elmsley's careful edition of the Laurentian scholia on Sophocles was published at the Clarendon press by Thomas Gaisford, who was born only six years later than Elmsley, and survived him by more than thirty. He was appointed regius professor of Greek at Oxford in 1812, and was dean of Christ Church for the last twenty-four years of his life. He first made his mark, in 1810, by his edition of Hephaestion's Manual of Greek Metre. He published an annotated edition of the Poetae Minores Graeci; but almost all the rest of his work was in the province of Greek prose. Thus, he prepared a variorum edition of Aristotle's Rhetoric, and also edited Herodotus and Stobaeus, and the great lexicon of Suidas as well as the Etymologicum Magnum. A certain deflection from the Porsonian tradition at Cambridge is exemplified by Samuel Butler, who was educated at Rugby and St John's, and was headmaster of Shrewsbury from 1798 to 1836, and bishop of Lichfield for the last three years of his life. For the syndics of the Cambridge press he edited Aeschylus, after Stanley's text, with the Greek scholia, and also with the notes of Stanley and his predecessors, and selections from those of subsequent editors, and a synopsis of 'various readings.' It was ably reviewed by Charles James Blomfield, who described it as 'an indiscriminate coacervation' of all that had been 'expressly written on Aeschylus,' and, many years afterwards, said of Butler, 'he was a really learned as well as amiable man, but his forte did not lie in verbal criticism.' He was interested in classic travel, and his Atlas of Ancient Geography, first published in 1822, passed through many editions, and was reprinted as late as 1907. The Porsonian type of scholarship, represented at Oxford by Elmsley, was maintained at Cambridge by three fellows of Trinity: Dobree, Monk and C. J. Blomfield. The first of these, Peter Paul Dobree, was indebted to his birth in Guernsey for his mastery of French. He edited (with many additions of his own) Porson's Aristophanica, as well as Porson's transcript of Photius. He was regius professor of Greek for the last two years of his life (1823-5). His Adversaria on the Greek poets, historians and orators, as well as his transcript of the Lexicon rhetoricum Cantabrigiense, and his Notes on Inscriptions, were edited byxv] Dobree. Monk. Blomfield. Kennedy 329 his successor, James Scholefield, who, in 1828, produced, in his edition of Aeschylus, the earliest English attempt to embrace in a single volume the results of modern criticism on the text of that poet. While Dobree was a follower of Porson in the criticism of Aristophanes, he broke new ground as a critic of the Attic orators. As professor of Greek, Porson was immediately succeeded by James Henry Monk, of Charterhouse and Trinity, afterwards dean of Peterborough, and bishop of Gloucester and Bristol. Following in the steps of Porson and Elmsley, Monk edited four plays of Euripides, the Hippolytus and Alcestis and the two Iphigenias. The year of his consecration as bishop was that of the first publication of his admirable Life of Bentley (1830). Monk's fellow-editor of Porson's Adversaria in 1812 was Charles James Blomfield, who edited, with notes and glossaries, the Prometheus, Septem, Persae, Agamemnon and Choephoroe. The Prometheus of 1810 was the first text of any importance printed by the Cambridge press in the 'Porson type.' The best part of Blomfield's edition of each of these plays was the glossary, a feature of special value in days when there was no good Greek and English lexicon. He also edited Callimachus, and collected (in the Museum Criticum) the fragments of Sappho, Alcaeus, Stesichorus and Sophron. For the last thirty-three years of his life, he was successively bishop of Chester and of London. Among the ablest of Samuel Butler's pupils at Shrewsbury was Benjamin Hall Kennedy, fellow of St John's, who succeeded Butler as headmaster, a position which he filled with the highest distinction for thirty years. Born in 1804, he died in 1889, after holding the Greek professorship at Cambridge for the last twentytwo years of his life. His best-known works are his Latin Primer, and his Public School Latin Grammar. He also published, with translation and notes, the Agamemnon of Aeschylus, the Oedipus Tyrannus of Sophocles, the Birds of Aristophanes and the Theaetetus of Plato. His school edition of Virgil was followed by his Cambridge edition of the text. He produced many admirable renderings in Greek and Latin verse, as principal contributor to Sabrinae Corolla, and sole author of Between Whiles. His younger brother, Charles Rann Kennedy, is remembered as translator of Demosthenes. The senior classic of 1830, Christopher Wordsworth, nephew of the poet, travelled in Greece, where he discovered the site of Dodona. He was afterwards headmaster of Harrow, and finally bishop of Lincoln. Of his classical publications, the most widely known is330

Greek Scholars

[CH.

his 'pictorial, descriptive and historical' work on Greece. Breadth of geographic and historic interest, rather than minute scholarship, was the main characteristic of the able edition of Herodotus produced by his contemporary, Joseph William Blakesley, ultimately dean of Lincoln. Edmund Law Lushington, the senior classic of 1832, is represented in literature mainly by the inaugural discourse On the Study of Greek, delivered in 1839 at the beginning of his long tenure of the Greek professorship at Glasgow. Wedded to Tennyson's youngest sister, he is happily described, in the epilogue to In Memoriam, as 'wearing all that weight of learning lightly like a flower.' The second place in the tripos of 1832 was won by Richard Shilleto, of Trinity (finally fellow of Peterhouse), who soon became famous as a private tutor in classics. A consummate master of Greek idiom, he produced notable editions of the speech De Falsa Legatione of Demosthenes, and of the first and second books of Thucydides, while his genius as an original writer of Greek verse was exemplified in fugitive flysheets in the style of Aristophanes or Theocritus. His distinguished contemporary, William Hepworth Thompson, regius professor of Greek from 1853 to 1867, and, for the last twenty years of his life, master of Trinity, produced admirable commentaries on the Phaedrus and Gorgias of Plato, and, by his personal influence, did much towards widening the range of classical studies in Cambridge. His dry humour is exemplified by many memorable sayings, while the serene dignity of his presence still survives in the portrait by Herkomer in the hall of his college. Thompson had a high regard for the original and independent scholarship of Charles Badham, of Wadham college, Oxford, and of Peterhouse, Cambridge. Badham gave ample proof of his ability and his critical acumen in his editions of three plays of Euripides, and of five dialogues of Plato. He was specially attracted to the school of Porson, and of the great Dutch scholar, Cobet, to whom he dictated a letter written on his death-bed at Sydney, where he passed the last seventeen years of his life as professor of classics and logic. Among Thompson's contemporaries at Trinity was John William Donaldson, whose New Cratylts and Varronianus gave a considerable impulse to the study of comparative philology and ethnology. His name is also associated with a comprehensive work on The Theatre of the Greeks, an edition of Pindar and a Greek and a Latin grammar. A volume, in which he contendedxv] Thoampson. Donaldson. Paley.

Cope 331

that the lost book of Jasher formed 'the religious marrow of the Scriptures,' caused much excitement in theological circles, and led to his resigning the headmastership of Bury St Edmunds school. He subsequently wrote an interesting work entitled Classical Scholarship and Classical Learning, and translated and completed K. 0. Miiller's History of Greek Literature. Donaldson's younger contemporary, Frederick Apthorp Paley, of Shrewsbury and St John's, was a man of wide and varied interests. An eager botanist, and an enthusiastic student of ecclesiastical architecture, he joined the church of Rome in 1846, returned to Cambridge as a private tutor from 1860 to 1874 and, after three years' tenure of a professorship in a catholic college in Kensington, spent the last eleven years of his life at Bournemouth. His edition of Aeschylus with Latin notes was followed by an English edition, which is widely recognised as his best work. He also edited Euripides, Hesiod, Theocritus and the Iliad. An incidental remark by Donaldson on certain resemblances between the Iliad and the late epic of Quintus Smyrnaeus led Paley to maintain that the Homeric poems in their present form were not earlier than the age of Alexander. In the preface to his Euripides he protests against the purely textual notes characteristic of the school of Porson. Edward Meredith Cope, of Trinity, who was educated under Kennedy at Shrewsbury, is best known as the author of an elaborate introduction to the Rhetoric of Aristotle, which was followed by a comprehensive commentary. William George Clark, of Shrewsbury and Trinity, published in his Peloponnesus, in 1858, the results of a Greek tour taken in the company of Thompson. During his tenure of the office of public orator, from 1857 to 1869, a critical edition of Shakespeare, designed in 1860, was successfully completed by Clark and Aldis Wright1. Clark's name has been fitly commemorated by the establishment, at Trinity college, of the 'Clark Lectureship in the Literature of England.' His contemporary, Churchill Babington, of St John's, produced, in 1851-8, the editio princeps of four of the recently discovered speeches of Hyperides. He was also interested in botany, and in the birds of Suffolk, and was Disney professor of archaeology from 1865 to 1880. Born a year later than Clark and Babington, Hubert Ashton Holden, fellow of Trinity and afterwards headmaster of Ipswich, edited a school-text of Aristophanes, with an exhaustive Onomasticon, and produced elaborate commentaries 1 Cf. ante, vol. v, p. 280.332 Greek Scholars [CH. on three of the treatises of Xenophon, and on eight of Plutarch's Lives, besides editing Cicero, De Officiis, and two of his speeches. Kennedy's successor as regius professor of Greek was Richard Claverhouse Jebb, of Charterhouse and Trinity, who was elected public orator in 1869, professor of Greek at Glasgow in 1875, and at Cambridge in 1889. For the last sixteen years of his life he held the Cambridge professorship, and, for the last fourteen, was member for the university. He will long be remembered as the accomplished editor of Sophocles and Bacchylides, and as the eloquent author of The Attic Orators. His other works include an annotated text and translation of the Characters of Theophrastus, an Introduction to Homer, with lectures on modern Greece and on Greek poetry, and monographs on Erasmus and on Bentley. A humanist in the highest sense of the term, he assimilated the spirit of classical literature, and The Attic Orators revealed to the literary world the fact that one of the foremost among living Greek scholars was himself an artist in English prose. His Sophocles has been justly characterised as 'one of the most finished, comprehensive, and valuable works, in the sphere of literary exposition, which this age or any has produced,'1 and these consummate qualities were also exhibited in his latest work, his complete edition of Bacchylides. His powers as a writer of classical verse had already been proved by his three Pindaric Odes, to one of which allusion was made by the poet laureate of the day in his dedication of Demeter. The most brilliant scholar of his time, he unconsciously portrayed his own gifts, when, in his admirable monograph on Bentley, he translated that great scholar's declaration that 'wide reading' and erudite 'knowledge of Greek and Latin antiquity' are not enough for the modern critic of an ancient author: A man should have all that at his fingers' ends.... But, besides this, there is need of the keenest judgment, of sagacity and quickness, of a certain divining tact and inspiration, as was said of Aristarchus-a faculty which can be acquired by no constancy of toil or length of life, but comes solely by the gift of nature and the happy star2. As member for the university of Cambridge, Sir Richard Jebb was succeeded by Samuel Henry Butcher, of Marlborough and Trinity, professor of Greek in the university of Edinburgh from 1882 to 1903, and ultimately president of the British Academy. Besides producing a compendious work on Demosthenes, and the

1 Verrall, A. W., in Biographisches Jahrbuch, Leipzig, 1906, p. 77. 2 Jebb's Bentley, p. 210.xv] 7ebb. Butcher. Ferrall. Adam

333

earlier portion of a critical text of that orator, he took part in a memorable translation of the Odyssey, published a critical text and translation of Aristotle's treatise on poetry, and was the author of two volumes of suggestive and inspiring lectures on the genius and on the originality of Greece. A masterly review of the great qualities of Sir Richard Jebb, as scholar and critic, and especially as editor of Sophocles, was written by Butcher's friend and contemporary, Arthur Woolgar Verrall, of Wellington and Trinity, who, in his own editions of plays of Aeschylus and Euripides, and in his essays on the latter poet, gave proof of a singular aptitude for verbal emendation, and of acute literary insight. Part of the too brief life of Walter Headlam, of Harrow and King's, was devoted to emending and translating Aeschylus, while his Book of Greek Verse gave ample evidence of his taste as an interpreter and an imitator of the Greek poets. A volume of admirable translations into Greek verse and prose was published by Richard Dacre Archer-Hind, of Shrewsbury and Trinity, who also produced excellent editions of the Phaedo and Timaeus of Plato. An elaborate commentary on the Republic was the most notable achievement of James Adam, of Aberdeen and of Caius and Emmanuel, whose Gifford lectures, entitled The Religious Teachers of Greece, were followed by a volume of collected papers under the title The Vitality of Platonism, and other Essays. In the age succeeding that of Elmsley and Gaisford, Greek scholarship was well represented at Oxford by Henry George Liddell, dean of Christ Church, and Robert Scott, master of Balliol, joint authors of the standard Greek and English lexicon, first published in 1843. As master of Balliol, Scott was succeeded in 1870 by Benjamin Jowett, who, in 1855, had succeeded Gaisford as professor of Greek. His complete translation of Plato was achieved in 1871, and was followed by his translations of Thucydides, and of the Politics of Aristotle. All these three great works were justly recognised as masterpieces of English; the rendering of Plato in particular, with its admirable introductions, has done much towards popularising the study of that author in the English world. Jowett's contemporary, Mark Pattison, rector of Exeter, is remembered by scholars as the author of Isaac Casaubon, and of Essays on Scaliger. His younger contemporary, Richard Copley Christie, of Lincoln college, and for some years professor in Manchester, wrote a valuable334

Greek Scholars

[CH.

life of Etienne Dolet, the Martyr of the Renaissance. By the side of Pattison and Jowett should be mentioned George Rawlinson, fellow of Exeter, who produced in 1858 a standard translation of Herodotus, with notes and essays, followed by a series of important volumes on the great oriental monarchiesl. An excellent edition of the Ethics of Aristotle, with an English commentary and illustrative essays, was first published in 1857 by Sir Alexander Grant, fellow of Oriel; and two accurate editions of the Politics were simultaneously produced in 1854 by J. R. T. Eaton, of Merton, and Richard Congreve, of Wadham. As regius professor of Greek, Jowett was succeeded by Ingram Bywater, fellow of Exeter, who held that office from 1893 to his resignation in 1908. The most important of the works of this admirably accurate scholar was his commentary on the Poetics. His valuable collection of some of the choicest specimens of ancient and modern Greek literature was left to the Bodleian. Among Jowett's pupils at Balliol was William Gunion Rutherford, ultimately headmaster of Westminster school. He made his mark mainly by his New Phrynichus, which, under the guise of a commentary on the grammatical rules of the Atticists of the second century A.D., was really a comprehensive treatise on the characteristics of Attic Greek. John Conington, afterwards better known as a Latin scholar, edited, in the early part of his career, the Agamemnon and Choephoroe of Aeschylus, and afterwards completed the Spenserian rendering of the Iliad by Philip Stanhope Worsley, translator of the Odyssey. A good translation of the Iliad into blank verse was published in 1864 by the earl of Derby. Rather earlier, in 1858, William Ewart Gladstone produced Studies on Homer and the Homeric Age, the greater part of the results of which were summed up eleven years later in his Juventus Mundi. He also published, under the title Homeric Synchronism, 'an enquiry into the time and place of Homer,' besides producing a primer on Homer. The Homeric poems were the constant theme of the devoted labours of David Binning Monro, provost of Oriel for the last twenty-three years of his life. His Grammar of the Homeric dialect, published in 1882, was ultimately followed by his edition of the second half of the Odyssey, with important 'appendices,' including a masterly discussion of the history of the Homeric poems. The Homeric question was also ably discussed 1 As to Pattison, R. C. Christie and George Rawlinson, see a later volume of this History.xv]

Latin Scholars

335

by John Stuart Blackie, professor of Greek in Edinburgh, and was more minutely studied by Sir William Duguid Geddes, professor of Greek at Aberdeen, who also produced an interesting edition of Plato's Phaedo. Among Latin scholars, mention may be made of Thomas Hewitt Key, of St John's and Trinity, Cambridge, professor of Latin at University college, London, from 1828 to 1842, and of comparative grammar from 1842 to 1875. His Latin Grammar was completed in 1846, while his Latin Dictionary was posthumously published from his unfinished manuscript in 1888. As professor of Latin, he was succeeded by George Long, who edited Cicero's Orations in 1851-8, and produced translations of thirteen of Plutarch's Roman Lives, and of the Meditations of Marcus Aurelius, and the Manual of Epictetus. His latest work was his History of the Decline of the Roman Republic1. Meanwhile, he had contributed numerous articles on Roman law and other subjects to the great series of dictionaries planned by William Smith, who was knighted in 1892, and who deserves to be remembered as a great organiser of learned literary labour. The dictionaries of Greek and Roman antiquities (1842, etc.), biography and mythology (1843, etc.) and geography (1857) were followed by dictionaries of the Bible and of Christian antiquities and Christian biography. The Latin and English dictionary of 1855, founded on Forcellini and Freund, has its counterpart in the English and Latin dictionary of 1870, compiled with the aid of Theophilus D. Hall and other scholars. Among the Latinists of England, the foremost place is due to Hugh Andrew Johnstone Munro, of Shrewsbury and Trinity, whose masterly edition of Lucretius, with critical notes and a complete commentary, and a vigorous rendering in English prose, was first published in 1864. Five years later he contributed a revised text, and a critical introduction, to the edition of Horace, with illustrations from ancient gems selected by the learned archaeologist, Charles William King. His other works include an edition of the Aetna of an unknown poet, and Criticisms and Elucidations of Catullus. His Translations into Latin and Greek Verse are justly held in high esteem. A masculine vigour is the main characteristic of all his work-of his Latin verse compositions, not less than of his Criticisms of Catullus, and his translation of Lucretius. The professorship of Latin vacated by Munro's resignation in 1 See ante, p. 307.336

Latin Scholars

[cH.

1872 was filled for the next twenty-eight years by John Eyton Bickersteth Mayor, of Shrewsbury and St John's, university librarian from 1864 to 1867. His Juvenal was first published in 1853. Not a few of the comprehensive notes in this work (especially in its later editions) are recognised as signally complete summaries of the literature of the subject concerned. The stamp of his profound learning is also impressed upon all his other works. Among those directly connected with classical scholarship may be mentioned his First Greek Reader, and his editions of Cicero's Second Philippic, and of the third book of Pliny's Letters. In 1863-9 he contributed to the Rolls series the two volumes of his learned edition of Richard of Cirencester. Nearly one hundred and fifty pages of the preface to the second volume are devoted to the examination of a work ascribed to Richard under the title De Situ Britanniae, proving it to be the work of 'a forger alike contemptible as penman, Latinist, historian, geographer, critic'; it was never mentioned until 1747, and its author was Charles Bertram, of Copenhagen. Mayor's activity, as editor and biographer, continued to the last, and extended into many paths of historical and antiquarian research1; while whatever he published was annotated with a minute and exhaustive erudition which is generally reserved for the leading representatives of classical literature. Five years younger than Mayor was the scholar, educational reformer and legal writer, Henry John Roby, senior classic of 1853, fellow and ultimately honorary fellow of St John's, where he began his career as a college lecturer and a private tutor for the seven years between 1854 and 1861, making his first public appearance in 1858 as the author of a pamphlet on college reform. His brief experience as a master at Dulwich convinced him of the need for improvements in the Latin grammar then in vogue, and led to his producing in 1862 his Elementary Latin Grammar, which profoundly modified Kennedy's revised version of the authorised text-book. This was followed, ten years later, by the first of the five editions of his Latin Grammar from Plautus to Suetonius, in which the principles of phonetics and physiology were for the first time applied to the life and growth of the Latin language. Meanwhile, at the end of 1864, he had been appointed secretary to the Endowed Schools commission, and wrote two of the chief parts of its report. His experience in 1866-8 as professor of jurisprudence at University college, London, ultimately 1 See bibliography.xv] Conington. Nettleship. Ellis. Sellar 3 3 7 bore fruit in 1884 in the two volumes of his Introduction to Justinian's Digest, and, again, in 1902, in the two volumes entitled Roman Private Law in the Times of Cicero and the Antonines, and in his Essays on the Law of Cicero's Private Orations. He was member for the Eccles division of Lancashire from 1890 to 1895, when he left Manchester and settled at Grasmere for the last twenty years of his life. A standard edition of Cicero, De Oratore, was prepared for the Oxford press by Augustus Samuel Wilkins, of St John's college, Cambridge, for many years professor of Latin and comparative philology in Manchester. He also edited Cicero's Speeches against Catiline, and Horace's Epistles, besides taking part in the translation of George Curtius's Principles of Greek Etymology, and of his work entitled The Greek Verb. The first professor of Latin at Oxford was John Conington, who was elected in 1854 and held the professorship for the last fifteen of the forty-four years of his life. He is widely known as the editor and translator of Virgil and Persius. His translation of Horace into English verse was regarded by Munro as 'on the whole perhaps the best and most successful translation of a Classic that exists in the English language.' Edwin Palmer filled the Latin chair from 1870 to 1878. Palmer's successor, Henry Nettleship, planned a great Latin dictionary, and published a tenth part of the proposed work under the title Contributions to Latin Lexicography. He was an able critic of the ancient Latin poets and grammarians, and many of his best papers have been collected in the two volumes of his Essays. In 1893 he was succeeded by Robinson Ellis, best known as the learned editor of Catullus. His metrical version of that author has many touches of true poetry. He was also known as the editor of Velleius Paterculus, Avianus and Orientius, of the Ibis and the Aetna and of the Appendix Vergiliana. An unswerving and unselfish love of Latin learning, for its own sake, was the leading characteristic of his work from first to last. Meanwhile, in Scotland, the professorship of humanity in Edinburgh was held by Conington's contemporary, a fellow of Oriel, William Young Sellar. Immediately before his appointment in 1863, he produced, in his Roman Poets of the Republic, a masterpiece of literary criticism, which was followed in due time by similar works on Virgil, and on Horace and the elegiac poets. Among Latin scholars in Ireland, mention should be made of Henry Ellis Allen, who, between 1836 and 1856, produced able E. L. XII. CH. XV. 22338

Classical Archaeologists

[CH.

critical editions of Cicero's philosophical works; and of James Henry, whose Aeneidea, of 1873 to 1889, includes many important contributions to the interpretation of the poet's text. In the next generation, textual criticism was the forte of Arthur Palmer, professor of Latin at Trinity college, Dublin, who was specially interested in the criticism of the elegiac poets and of Plautus. His contemporary, Robert Yelverton Tyrrell, who may fitly be described as doctus sermones utriusque linguae, edited the Bacchae of Euripides during his tenure of the professorship of Latin, and the Miles Gloriosus of Plautus on his promotion to the professorship of Greek. In 1879, he undertook an extensive commentary on the correspondence of Cicero, which, with the learned aid of Louis Claude Purser, he brought to a successful conclusion in 1900. He also published a critical text of Sophocles. His devotion to ancient and modern drama was combined with a keen wit and a felicitous style; and his appreciation of great writers was enhanced by his own delight in literary form. CLASSICAL ARCHAEOLOGISTS An interest in classical archaeology was fostered by the foundation of the society of Dilettanti at the close of 1733. The society produced a splendid series of archaeological publications, including Richard Chandler's Antiquities of lonia (1769 and 1797)1. Learned travel was also represented by Edward Dodwell's Classical and Topographical Tour through Greece (1819), and by his work on Cyclopian remains in Italy and Greece (1834); also by Sir William Gell's works on Troy and Ithaca, his itineraries of Greece and the Morea, and his Pompeiana (1817-32). One of the foremost of the Greek topographers of the nineteenth century was William Martin Leake, who, on retiring from active military service in 1815, devoted all his energies to the cause of classical learning. In his Researches in Greece (1814) he gives an elementary grammar of modern Greek, with a list of neo-Hellenic authors. This was followed by an important work entitled The Topography of Athens, and by Travels in Asia Minor, in the Morea, and in Northern Greece. In his Numismata Hellenica he described his great collection of Greek coins, which was afterwards acquired by the university of Cambridge. The geographical and historical elucidation of Thucydides was largely promoted by Thomas Arnold's edition of 1830-5, whose 1 See further in bibliography, ir.xv] Leake. Newton 339 History of Rome is noticed in another chapter1, where reference is also made to the chronological researches of Henry Fynes Clinton, of Christ Church, Oxford, the learned author of Fasti Hellenici and Fasti Romani. His younger contemporary William Mure travelled in Greece in 1838, and, in his Critical History of the Literature of Ancient Greece, showed a special interest in Xenophon. An Enquiry into the Credibility of Early Roman History was published in 1855 by Sir George Cornewall Lewis, who also translated Boeckh's Public Economy of Athens, edited Babrius and wrote on The Astronomy of the Ancients. Lycia was traversed in 1838 and 1840 by Charles Fellows, the discoverer of the Xanthian marbles, and, in 1842, by Thomas Abel Brimage Spratt and Edward Forbes. Nineveh was excavated in 1845 by (Sir) Austen Henry Layard. Crete was explored in 1851-3 by Spratt, and, more than half a century later, by (Sir) Arthur Evans, whose investigations, in and after 1893, resulted in the discovery of the pre-Phoenician script, and, finally (in 1900-8), in the excavation of the prehistoric palace of Cnossos. The necropolis of Cameiros in Rhodes was excavated by Salzmann and Biliotti in 1858 and 1865; Cyrene was explored in 1860-1 by (Sir) Robert Murdoch Smith and E. A. Porcher; the antiquities of Egypt were investigated by the aid of the Egypt Exploration Fund, and also by that of the Research Account founded by William Matthew Flinders Petrie in 1894, and enlarged as the British School of Archaeology in Egypt in 1905. Charles Thomas Newton, of Shrewsbury and of Christ Church, began in 1840 the long series of services to the British Museum which ended in 1885, when he completed the twenty-four years of his tenure of the office of keeper of Greek and Roman antiquities. That appointment marked the dawn of a true interest in classical archaeology in England. Newton's name had already been associated with the recovery of the remains of the Mausoleum of Halicarnassus in 1856. In 1880 he published a collected edition of his Essays in Art and Archaeology, including an excellent paper on Greek inscriptions. He was among the first to welcome the opening of the museums of classical archaeology at Cambridge and Oxford. At the inaugural ceremony at Cambridge in 1884 the cast of the figure of Proserpine, which he had himself discovered at Cnidos, prompted him to describe the occasion as 'the avoZSos of archaeology, so long buried in England.' In the study of Greek architecture an eminent position was 1 See ante, p. 303. 22-2340

Classical Archaeologists

[CH.

attained by Newton's contemporary, Francis Cranmer Penrose, who, as 'travelling bachelor of the university of Cambridge,' studied architecture in Rome and in Athens, where he was led by the theories of Pennethorne to determine the hyperbolic curve of the entasis of the columns of the Parthenon. The results were published in his Principles of Athenian Architecture in 18511. The study of classical archaeology has been fostered in England by the foundation of the societies for the Promotion of Hellenic and Roman Studies in 1879 and 1911, and by the institution of the British Schools of Archaeology at Athens (of which Penrose was the first director) in 1886 and at Rome in 1901. Fragments of Epicurus and Philodemus, discovered at Herculaneum in 1752, were published at Oxford in 1824 and 1891. Many remnants of Greek literature have been recovered from the sands of Egypt. Three of the speeches of the Attic orator, Hyperides, were discovered in 1847, and his Funeral Oration in 1856. Part of another oration was found in the series acquired by the British Museum in 1890, which also included Aristotle's Constitution of Athens, and the Mimes of Herodas, followed in 1896-7 by the Odes of Bacchylides. Among the literary papyri since published by the Graeco-Roman branch of the Egypt Exploration Fund have been the Paeans and Partheneia of Pindar, a large part of a satyric drama of Sophocles and numerous fragments of the Greek Bible. Among English editors of the Greek Testament, Christopher Wordsworth, afterwards bishop of Lincoln, published in 1856-9 a commentary on the Greek Testament which teems with citations from patristic literature. The German commentators are more fully noticed in the edition produced by Henry Alford, dean of Canterbury. Several of the Pauline epistles were elaborately edited by Charles John Ellicott, afterwards bishop of Gloucester and Bristol, and, with a higher degree of success, by Joseph Barber Lightfoot, bishop of Durham, who was also the editor of Clement of Rome, and of Ignatius and Polycarp. Critical texts of the Greek Testament were produced by Samuel Prideaux Tregelles, by Frederick Henry Scrivener, and, in 1881, by Brooke Foss Westcott, afterwards bishop of Durham, and Fenton John Anthony Hort. Of these last, the former published commentaries on the Gospel and the epistles of St John, and on the epistle to the Hebrews. English and American scholars joined in the revision of the

1 For other works on classical archaeology see bibliography.-1

1 - 7 rY 7 7

xvj urzentai oc/zoars 341 Authorised Version of the New Testament from June 1870 to November 1880. ORIENTAL SCHOLARS The Cambridge Hebraists of the nineteenth century include the names of Samuel Lee, professor of Hebrew and Arabic; William Hodge Mill, who is better known as a theologian; Frederick Field, whose edition of Origen's Hexapla placed him in the front rank of Hebrew and Syriac scholars; Peter Hamnett Mason, author of a Hebrew grammar and a rabbinical reader; Andrew Bruce Davidson, author of a Hebrew grammar and syntax, and of commentaries on the book of Job, and on several of the prophets; and Charles Taylor, master of St John's, editor of the Hebrew Sayings of the Fathers. William Aldis Wright, besides editing a commentary on the book of Job from a MS in the Cambridge library, was secretary of the Old Testament revision company from 1870 to 1885. At Oxford, the professorship of Hebrew was held for fifty-four years by Edward Bouverie Pusey1, author of A Commentary on the Minor Prophets and of Lectures on the Prophet Daniel; and, for thirty years, by Samuel Rolles Driver, author of An Introduction to the Literature of the Old Testament, and of commentaries on many parts of it, as well as joint author of a Hebrew-English lexicon. Meanwhile, in London, Christian David Ginsburg had, among his many important works, produced translations of The Song of Songs and of Ecclesiastes, and had published the Massorah, a 'Masoretico-critical' edition of the Hebrew Bible, with an introduction, and Facsimiles of MSS of the Hebrew Bible. William Cureton, of Christ Church, published a Syriac MS of The Epistles of St Ignatius in 1845-9, the Syriac version of The Festal Letters of Athanasius, and remains of the Syriac Gospels from a MS of the fifth century; Robert Payne Smith, dean of Canterbury, began, in 1868, the publication of an important Syriac lexicon; and Robert Lubbock Bensly, fellow of Gonville and Caius, who was the first to publish, in 1875, from an Amiens MS of the ninth century, the missing fragment of the Latin translation of the fourth book of Ezra, spent the last year of his life in deciphering the Syriac MS of the Gospels discovered in 1892 at St Catharine's, on mount Sinai. Bensly's discovery of the fragment of the fourth book of Ezra had been anticipated, in 1826, by John Palmer, fellow of St John's,

1 Cf. ante, pp. 262-3.342

Oriental Scholars

[CH.

professor of Arabic from 1804 to 1840, whose discovery was not published until 1877. Arabic was ably represented in the nineteenth century by Edward William Lane, author of the great Arabic lexicon, and translator of The Arabian Nights; by William Wright, professor of Arabic in Cambridge from 1870 to 1889, author of an excellent Arabic grammar, and a distinguished Syriac scholar; and by Edward Henry Palmer, lord almoner's reader in Cambridge, who showed the highest genius for the acquisition of oriental languages, travelled in the 'Desert of the Exodus' in 1868-9, and finally died in Arabia in the service of his country during the rebellion of Arabi in 1882. His successor in the readership, William Robertson Smith, a scholar of singular versatility, besides studying physics with distinction in Aberdeen, and becoming prominent as an advanced theologian, devoted himself to oriental languages, and was appointed librarian of the university of Cambridge, and, subsequently, professor of Arabic. In Turkish, one of the leading authorities was Sir James William Redhouse, author of a grammar and dictionary of the Ottoman language. Turkish, Arabic and Persian were successfully studied by Elias John Wilkinson Gibb, author of a History of Ottoman Poetry; and Persian, many years previously, by Sir William Ouseley, and by his younger brother, Sir Gore Ouseley. The cuneiform inscriptions of Persia, Assyria and Babylonia were deciphered between 1837 and 1851 by Sir Henry Creswicke Rawlinson, and, in 1849, by Edward Hincks, fellow of Trinity college, Dublin. In 1876, all the inscriptions relating to the Creation, which had been found in Assyria by George Smith, of the British Museum, were published in his Chaldaean Genesis. Among English Egyptologists special mention is due to Sir John Gardner Wilkinson, whose admirable Manners and Customs of the Ancient Egyptians, first published in 1837, attained its final form in 1878. Samuel Birch, of the British Museum, produced, in 1867, an Hieroglyphical Grammar and Dictionary, and a translation of The Book of the Dead, and, in 1858, a History of Ancient Pottery, a new and revised edition of which appeared in 1873. Among Chinese scholars, the most eminent have been the three missionaries-Robert Morrison, author of the first Chinese-English dictionary (1815-23), who translated the Bible with the cooperation of William Milne; Walter Henry Medhurst, translator of the Bible, and author of an English-Japanese, as well as a ChineseEnglish and English-Chinese, dictionary; and James Legge,xv] Arabic. Chinese. Sanskrit 343 translator of some Taoist classics, and of the whole of the Confucian canon. The last of these scholars was the first holder of the chair of Chinese founded at Oxford in 1875, while at Cambridge an honorary professorship of that language was held until 1895 by Sir Thomas Francis Wade, who presented to the university his valuable library of Chinese literature. The first Englishman who worked at Sanskrit to any purpose was Sir Charles Wilkins. He began his study of the language in India in 1778, encouraged by Warren Hastings, and, besides translating the Bhagavadgita and the Hitopadesa, produced a Sanskrit grammar in 1808. In 1786 (as we have already seen1) Sir William Jones had pointed out the affinity of Sanskrit with Greek, Latin, Gothic and Celtic, and, in 1789, its connection with Zend. Burnouf and Friedrich Schlegel learnt their Sanskrit from an Indian civilian, Alexander Hamilton, who was captured by Napoleon in 1802, and detained until 1807, and was thereby enabled to excite the first interest in that language in France and Germany. William Carey, the baptist missionary, published a Sanskrit grammar in 1806, edited and translated the Rcdmdyana and translated the Bible into Sanskrit. Henry Thomas Colebrooke produced elaborate renderings of two treatises on the law of inheritance, and of certain mathematical and philosophical works, while his collected Essays on Sanskrit literature (1837) are recognised as masterpieces of research. The study of the language was specially promoted by Horace Hayman Wilson, the first professor of Sanskrit at Oxford (1833), whose dictionary of 1819 and 1832 made the further study of the language possible in Europe. In 1860 he was succeeded in the chair by (Sir Monier) Monier Williams, who completed his SanskritEnglish dictionary in 1872, and brought about the foundation of the Indian Institute in 1883. Meanwhile, Friedrich Max Miiller, who had settled at Oxford in 1848, and had published an edition of The Rigveda in 1849-73, gave two admirable courses of Lectures on the Science of Languages at the Royal Institution in 1861-4, which led to his appointment as professor of comparative philology at Oxford in 1868. In and after 1875, he edited the important series known as The Sacred Books of the East. From 1867 to 1903, Edward Byles Cowell of Magdalen hall, Oxford, president of the Sanskrit college, Calcutta, was the first holder of the professorship of Sanskrit at Cambridge, and, with the aid of his pupils, issued an important series of Sanskrit texts and translations., Ante, p. 327.344

English Scholars

[cH.

ENGLISH SCHOLARS The dictionary of Anglo-Saxon, begun by Edward Lye, was completed by Owen Manning in 1776. The next landmark in the literature of the subject was the publication of Sharon Turner's History of the Anglo-Saxons, in 1799-1805. Benjamin Thorpe, who studied at Copenhagen under Rask, published Rask's AngloSaxon Grammar in English in 1830, translated Caedmon in 1832 and Beowulf in 1855, and edited The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle in 1861; while John Mitchell Kemble, of Trinity college, Cambridge, a friend and pupil of Jacob Grimm, edited Beowulf in 1833, and the Codex Diplomaticus Aevi Saxonici, in six volumes, in 1839 -48, founding on this great collection of charters his important work entitled The Saxons in England (1849)2. Richard Morris, in his Specimens of Early English (1867), distinguished the chief characteristics of the three main dialects of middle English, the northern, midland and southern. Joseph Bosworth, of Trinity college, Cambridge, after publishing his elementary grammar in 1823 and his larger dictionary in 1838, filled the chair of AngloSaxon at Oxford from 1858 to 1876, and, by a gift dating from 1867, brought about the foundation of the Elrington and Bosworth professorship at Cambridge eleven years later. The professorship was held from 1878 to 1912 by Walter William Skeat, fellow of Christ's college, the unwearied editor of many English classics, including Piers Plowman, Barbour's Bruce and Chaucer, and author of An Etymological Dictionary of the English Language3. The publications of the Early English Text society and the Scottish Text society concern language rather than literature; and in this connection we may also mention those of the Philological society and the English Dialect society. Celtic studies have made much progress, not only in Ireland, but also in Scotland and in Wales. ARCHAEOLOGICAL ANTIQUARIES Richard Gough, the first of the English antiquaries to be noticed in this chapter, devoted his whole life to antiquarian research. He had inherited a large fortune, and, even in his undergraduate days at Corpus Christi college, Cambridge, was already beginning Anecdotes of British Topography, which he published in 1768 and enlarged in 1780. He was the author of 1 Cf. vol. xiII. 2 Cf. ibid. 3 For Shakespearean scholars, see ante, vol. v, pp. 277-280, and bibliography to chaps. viii-xii.xv]

Archaeological Antiquaries

345

the 'History of the Society of Antiquaries' prefixed to their Archaeologia. He also produced in 1789 an expanded edition of the English translation of Camden's Britannia. Moreover, in 1786, he had begun Sepulchral Monuments of Great Britain, which he completed in 1799. The second volume of this was hailed by Horace Walpole as 'the most splendid work' he had ever seen. Gough's Anecdotes of British Topography was continued in the ten volumes of John Nichols's Bibliotheca Topographica (1780-1800), whose most important work was The History and Antiquities of the Town and County of Leicester, published from 1795 to 1815. He also supplied the elaborate index to Bowyer's Literary Anecdotes of the Eighteenth Century, while the work entitled Illustrations of the Literary History of that century, begun by John Nichols, was completed by his son, John Bowyer, and his grandson, John Gough Nichols'. Three volumes of The Beauties of Wiltshire, five of The Architectural Antiquities of Great Britain, and six of The Cathedral Antiquities, with single volumes on 'Picturesque Antiquities of English Cities,' on St Mary Redcliffe church, Bristol, on Fonthill abbey, and on Windsor castle, form a large part of the works of John Britton, a native of Wiltshire. It was said of him that 'his elegantly-illustrated works have been a chief exciting cause in bringing about the improved state of public feeling with reference to our national antiquities.'2 In conjunction with Edward Wedlake Brayley he edited, in 1801-14, nine volumes of The Beauties of England and Wales. Daniel Lysons, in conjunction with his brother, Samuel, began, under the title Magna Britannia, an account of Great Britain, dealing with the first ten counties in alphabetical order from Bedfordshire to Devonshire (1806-22). The volumes were welcomed, in The Gentleman's Magazine, as 'a rich museum of valuable curiosities.' The topographical collections for the remainder of the great work are preserved in sixty-four volumes among the manuscripts of the British Museum (Additional MSS, 9408-71). The principal separate work of Daniel Lysons was The Environs of London, while his brother is best known by his Reliquiae Britannico-Romanae. A large amount of valuable work was accomplished by Thomas Dunham Whitaker, of St John's college, Cambridge. His publications included, with other works on the topography 1 Nichols's Literary Anecdotes, vol. vi, pp. 262-343. 2 Life of Britton in Knight's English Cyclopaedia. For his other works, see biblio. graphy.346 Archaeological Antiuaries [CH. of northern England, a History of Richmondshire. This important work was completed in two folio volumes in 1823, with thirty-two plates by Turner. Its merits and defects are thus summed up in The Retrospective Review1: No work of County History has hitherto issued from the press (not excepting even Sir Richard Hoare's magnificent Wiltshire) so splendid, in respect both of typography and graphic illustration, as Dr Whitaker's Richmond; and yet, with all the author's high reputation and acknowledged talent, few (we believe) have fallen so far short of the expectations formed by readers of real science and desirous of substantial information, principally in those very points in which we have represented Mr Baker as far excelling. The work of George Baker, extolled in the above passage, is his History and Antiquities of Northamptonshire, published in five parts between 1822 and 1841, and then abandoned from lack of adequate support. A history of Hallamshire, published in 1819, and enlarged fifty years later, was produced by Joseph Hunter, the historian of South Yorkshire (1828-31). Other counties have their 'histories.' They may be described as works of various degrees of merit; but it is hardly necessary to enumerate them, especially as they are in process of being absorbed and superseded by The Victoria County Histories. There are also special bibliographies of the literature of several of the counties: e.g. Cornwall, Devon, Dorset, Gloucestershire, Hampshire, Lancashire, Norfolk and Shropshire. The foundation of the study of English folklore was laid by The Antiquities of the Common People, first published at Newcastle by Henry Bourne in 1725, and re-issued in an expanded form by John Brand in 1777. In 1813, 1843 and 1849 it was greatly enlarged by Sir Henry Ellis, principal librarian of the British Museum, who published An Introduction to Domesday Book, and eleven volumes of Original Letters, illustrative of English History, with notes and illustrations (1824-48), and also prepared a new edition of Dugdale's Monasticon Anglicanum. The Roman antiquities of Caerleon were repeatedly described by John Edward Lee, author of Imperial Profiles, enlarged from Roman coins (1874). The Roman wall was the theme of an admirable hand-book by John Collingwood Bruce, that reached a fifth edition in 1907. Bruce was also editor of Lapidarium Septentrionale, a volume illustrated by nearly a thousand woodcuts and maps and describing the monuments of Roman rule in the north of England (1875). The 'Antiquarian Notes' in 1 Vol. ix (1824), p. 223.xv] England 347 The Gentleman's Magazine were edited for many years by Charles Roach Smith, who wrote on the antiquities of Richborough, Reculver, Lymne and Faversham, in Kent, and also on Roman London. The ancient remains collected by him during a course of twenty years were purchased for the British Museum. He also wrote on the birthplace and the rural life of Shakespeare, as illustrated by his works; in conjunction with Thomas Wright, he founded the British Archaeological association in 1843; and, in 1883, he published in his Retrospections a review of the researches of English antiquaries during the past forty years. Among the many antiquarian publications of Thomas Wright1 was an account of the excavations of Wroxeter (1872). William Thompson Watkin devoted special attention to the Roman antiquities of England and Wales. His Roman Lancashire (1882) takes rank with the best local histories of the Roman occupation of Britain, and is even surpassed by his later work entitled Roman Cheshire (1886). An admirably illustrated work entitled Romano-British Mosaic Pavements was published by Thomas Morgan in 1886. A work on the archaeology of the northern nations, under the title Horae Ferales, which had been left unfinished by John Mitchell Kemble, was edited in 1863 by (Sir) Augustus Wollaston Franks, of Trinity college, Cambridge, ultimately keeper of mediaeval antiquities in the British Museum, who wrote numerous memoirs on archaeological subjects, besides drawing up the catalogue of his own priceless collection of porcelain. The many-sided antiquary Sir John Evans, who was successively president of the Geological, Numismatic and Antiquarian societies, and contributed largely to their Transactions, is best remembered as the author of three important works, each of them a masterpiece in its special department of study: (1) The Coins of the Ancient Britons (1864); (2) The Ancient Stone Implements, Weapons, and Ornaments of Great Britain (1872); and (3) The Ancient Bronze Implements, Weapons, and Ornaments of Great Britain and Ireland (1881). The second of these was welcomed as 'an admirable summary of the facts and the deductions as to... the relative antiquity of these rude relics of the earliest inhabitants'2; and the third, as 'a rich repertory of facts...skilfully marshalled in such fashion as to form an organised body.'3

1 See post, p. 353. 2 The Academy, vol. vi, p. 159.

3 Ibid. vol. xx, p. 33.348

Archaeological Antiquaries

[cH.

Under the title Textrinum Antiquum, 'an account of the art of weaving among the ancients' was produced in 1843 by James Yates, a unitarian minister, whose work was welcomed as 'worthy of the best days of critical antiquarianism,' and as 'deserving to rank with the works of the Graevii and the Gronovii of past ages.'l A History of British Costumes, the result of ten years' study, had meanwhile been published by a versatile writer, James Robinson Planch6. Primeval History (1846), and Ancient Egypt (1850) and Phoenicia (1857), were among the earlier productions of one who has been regarded as the greatest scholar among the unitarians, John Kenrick2. With a view to the reconstruction of the past, ancient remains and the manners and customs of modern savages were studied in Prehistoric Times (1865) by Sir John Lubbock (afterwards Lord Avebury), who also wrote The Origin of Civilization, and the Primitive Condition of Man (1870). The same subjects were treated from a different point of view, and with different results, by John Ferguson MacLennan, author of Primitive Marriage. In 1883, under the influence of Sir Henry Maine's Ancient Law and Village Communities, The English Village Community 'in its relations to the manorial and tribal systems, and to the common or open field system of husbandry' was published by Frederic Seebohm, who subsequently produced The Tribal System of Wales3. The British Barrows of canon Greenwell, of Durham, (1877) supplied a very full and accurate record of the examination of sepulchral mounds in various parts of England. Ten years later, the same author published an important monograph, The electrurn coinage of Cyzicus. George William Kitchin, dean of Durham, author of a History of France, wrote on Winchester, and on the great screen of its cathedral; and a History of the Cathedral Church of Wells was written in 1870 by Edward Augustus Freeman. The Architectural History of the University and Colleges of Cambridge, together with that of Eton college, begun by Robert Willis, was continued and brought to a successful conclusion by John Willis Clark, registrary of the university from 1891 to his death in 1910, who also deserves to be remembered for his work on Barnwell priory, and for his fine volume on the history of libraries entitled The Care of Books. In 1872 Mackenzie Edward Charles Walcott had published 1 The Literary Gazette, 1844, p. 89. 2 As to his other publications, see bibliography. 3 Cf. a later volume, where see, also, as to Sir Henry Maine.xv] England 349 Traditions and Customs of Cathedrals, followed in 1874 by A History of the Cathedrals, Conventual Foundations, Collegiate Churches, and Hospitals of Scotland. The latter work was said to have largely supplied what Scotland had long needed, 'a Dodsworth, a Dugdale, a Ware, or an Archdale, who should employ his leisure in the preparation of her Monasticon'. A Survey of London, intended to do for modern London what Stow had done for the Elizabethan city, was unfortunately left unfinished by Sir Walter Besant, whose keen interest in the subject was, however, partly proved by his completed works, London (1892), Westminster (1895) and South London (1899). George Thomas Clark, a founder of the Archaeological association (now the Royal Archaeological institute), propounded, in his Mlediaeval Military Architecture in England (1884), the theory that the castle of Norman times was identical with the burh of the Old English Chronicle; but this theory has been, practically, overthrown by later authorities. Other important works on the same general subject were The Castles of England, their Story and Structure, by Sir James Dixon Mackenzie (1897), and the unfinished Border Holds of Northumberland by Cadwallader John Bates2. The antiquities of Scotland, as well as those of England and Wales, were explored by Francis Grose, an excellent draughtsman and accomplished scholar of Swiss origin, whose work, The Antiquities of England and Wales, begun in 1777, was completed ten years later. Two years after its completion, he set out for Scotland, where he met Robert Burns, and was immortalised by him in the famous song beginning 'Ken ye ought o' Captain Grose,' while, in another poem, 'Hear, land o' Cakes, and brither Scots,' he playfully warned all Scotsmen of this chield amang them, taking notes. The two volumes of Grose's Antiquities of Scotland were completed in 1791, which was also the year of his death, and of the publication of his posthumous work, The Antiquities of Ireland. Captain Grose, who has been aptly described as 'a sort of antiquarian Falstaff,' is further known as the author of a treatise entitled Ancient Armour and Weapons, and of two volumes on military antiquities. The Society of Antiquaries of Scotland was founded in Edinburgh in 1780, at a time when captain Grose was still engaged on The Antiquities of England and Wales. 1 The Athenaeum, no. 2444. 2 See the bibliography on pp. xiii-xxi of A. Hamilton Thompson's Military Architecture during the Middle Ages (1912).350 ArcAaeological Antiquaries [CH. A comprehensive topographical and historical account of Scotland was published in 1807-24 in the Caledonia of George Chalmers, who devoted a large part of his life to this stupendous work, which, unhappily, remained unfinished. The author has been described by Dibdin as 'the Atlas of Scottish Antiquaries and Historians; bearing on his shoulders whatever has been collected, and with pain separately endured by his predecessors'; one 'whom neither difficulties tire, nor dangers daunt.' During his previous migration to Maryland, he had made a collection of 'Treaties' and of 'Political Annals of the... Colonies.' After his return to Scotland, he wrote lives of Ruddiman, Sir David Lyndsay and Mary queen of Scots. The Scottish section of his library has been described as 'one of the most valuable collections of works on the history and literature of Scotland ever formed by a private individual.'1 In the next generation, Sir John Graham Dalyell, author of The Darker Superstitions of Scotland (1834), gave proof of being a remarkably versatile antiquary. James Logan was a man of some note as the author of The Scottish Gael, or Celtic Manners as preserved amongst the Highlanders (1831), and also of the two illustrated folios on the Clans of the Scottish Highlands (1843-9), regarded in their day as 'one of the most valuable and interesting works of modern times.' Robert Stuart, the bookseller and antiquary of Glasgow, produced, in his Caledonia Romana of 1845, 'a descriptive account of the Roman antiquities of Scotland.' John Stuart, of Edinburgh, published, in 1856, The Sculptured Stones of Scotland, besides editing, in 1869, The Book of Deer, and preparing for publication, in 1872, Archaeological Essays by the eminent physician, Sir James Young Simpson. Contributions to Scottish Ethnology was the title of the first important work of John Beddoe, who was born in Worcestershire in 1826, and educated in the universities of London and Edinburgh, and was president of the Anthropological society in 1869-70. He subsequently wrote The Races of Britain (1885), and The 1 Cf. David Murray's David Laing, p. 33. The Antiquary was given to the world by ' the author of Waverley' in 1815. The character of the whimsical virtuoso, Jonathan Oldbuck of Monkbarns, was partly founded on that of an old friend of Scott's youth, George Constable, of Wallace Craigie, near Dundee, while the scene in which Edie Ochiltree interrupts the antiquary's ecstatic description of the Praetorium of Agrippa by exclaiming, ' Praetorian here, Praetorian there, I mind the bigging o't,' is an echo of an incident that actually happened to an antiquary of great learning and acuteness, Sir John Clerk, of Penicuik, one of the barons of the Scottish court of exchequer, when he conducted the English antiquary, Roger Gale, to the Roman station of Birrenswark, in Dumfriesshire.xv]

Scotland. Ireland

351

Anthropological History of Europe (1891). The Archaeology and Prehistoric Annals of Scotland, published in 1851 by (Sir) Daniel Wilson, afterwards president of the university of Toronto, formed an epoch in the study of the earlier antiquities of Scotland, and invested antiquities with all the charms of graceful literature. Sir Daniel was also the author of 'Researches into the origin of civilisation in the Old and the New World,' published under the title Prehistoric Man, a work teeming with interesting matter clothed in a clear and graphic style. The Rhind lectures in archaeology were founded by Alexander Henry Rhind, who made a special study of Scottish antiquities, and, during a visit to Egypt for the benefit of his health, collected the materials for a work entitled Thebes, its Tombs and their Tenants (1862). In Irish archaeology, the first name of permanent importance is that of George Petrie. In 1833 he was appointed to superintend the historical and antiquarian sections of the ordnance survey of Ireland. It was originally proposed to add to the maps of each district a memoir on its past history and its ancient monuments, but, after one volume of the proposed series had been issued, the work was suddenly dropped on the alleged ground of expense. Petrie's three chief essays were the outcome of his work on the survey. In his prize-essay, The Round Towers of Ireland (1833), he dispelled the theory of their pagan origin by proving that they were Christian belfries; and this essay was expanded into his great work, The Ecclesiastical Architecture of Ireland (1845). His second essay, Antiquities of Tara (1843), was originally intended for the ordnance memoir on Meath. The manuscript of the third, Irish Military Architecture, still remains among the archives of the Royal Irish academy. As a landscape painter, he had been attracted by the surpassing interest of Irish antiquities. He traversed the whole country 'in search of subjects for his canvas, and, at the same time, made copious notes and sketches of buildings,' besides collecting antiquities, and reaping 'a vast harvest of traditional music.'2 Petrie, on joining the Irish academy, arranged the small series of weapons and implements presented by the king of Denmark. After his death, his own collection was added, and, in 1857-62, all the antiquarian acquisitions of the academy were described in an amply illustrated catalogue by the distinguished physician, Sir William Wilde, who thus provided 'the quarry from which all later

1 The Westminster Review, April 1856, p. 384. 2 Macalister, R. A. S., in The Journal of the Ivernian Society, vol. v (1912), p. 30.352 Archaeological Azntiquaries [CH. writers on Irish antiquities draw their materials.'1 The Royal Irish academy had grown from a society established in Dublin about 1782. The Kilkenny Archaeological society, founded in 1849, became, in 1869, the 'Royal Historical and Archaeological Association of Ireland,' and, in 1890, the 'Royal Society of Antiquaries of Ireland.' Turning from Ireland to India, we note that the Asiatic society of Bengal was founded by Sir William Jones in 1784, and that, in 1811, the eminent Sanskrit scholar, Horace Hayman Wilson, was appointed secretary of that body. Wilson was also an original member of the Royal Asiatic society, and director of it from 1837 to his death in 1860. Most of his works were specially connected with the Sanskrit language and literature2; but he was also an Indian antiquary. His Ariana Antiqua (1841) is 'a Descriptive Account of the Antiquities and Coins of Afghanistan,' including a chapter on 'the progress of discovery' of Indian monuments, and a 'Memoir on the Topes' by Charles Masson, the traveller in Balochistan. James Tod, who lived in India from 1800 to 1823, published The Antiquities of Rajpootana, ranked by cardinal Wiseman 'among the most valuable, as well as among the most beautiful works upon Eastern literature.' As secretary of the Asiatic society of Bengal, Wilson was succeeded, in 1832, by James Prinsep, who, as an assay-master in northern India, collected the materials for his earliest work, his Benares illustrated (1831). He also paid special attention to the deciphering of inscriptions. The Kharosthi alphabet, written from right to left, ceased to be used in India in the third century of our era; while the Brahmi, written from left to right, is the source of all later Indian alphabets. A collection of Prinsep's Essays on Indian Antiquities, bearing on these and on cognate topics, was published by Edward Thomas in 1858. Edwin Norris, in a paper on 'the Kapur-di-Giri rock-inscription' (1845), pointed out the method of deciphering an alphabet, which had been previously unknown, thus making, in the words of H. H. Wilson, 'an unexpected and interesting accession to our knowledge of the palaeography and ancient history of India.'3 The office of directorgeneral of the archaeological survey of India was ably filled from 1870 to 1885 by major-general Sir Alexander Cunningham, who had made his mark in antiquarian literature by his Essay on the

1 Macalister, R. A. S., I.c. vol. v (1913), p. 85. 3 Transactions of the Royal Asiatic Society, 1845.

2 Cf. ante, p. 343.y A

 I

xvj lzterary zintzquarzes 353 Architecture of the Temples of Kashmir (1848), followed by The Bhilsa Topes, or Buddhist Monuments of Central India (1854). He also wrote The Ancient Geography of India (1871), and published an important Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum (1879). James Fergusson, who went to India in 1829 as an indigoplanter, settled in London in 1839, and devoted himself to archaeological research. The author of the well-known Illustrated Iland-book of Architecture, which deals with the styles of all ages and countries, was led by his early life in India to take a special interest in its ancient architecture and its religious institutions. Such was the origin of his Rock-cut Temples of India (1864), his Tree and Serpent Worship, with its illustrations from the sculptures of Buddhist topes (1863 and 1873), and his joint work The Cave Temples of India (1880). The coins of ancient India were investigated by H. H. Wilson, in his Ariana Antiqua; by James Prinsep in his Essays; by Edward Thomas in his Ancient Indian Weights; and by Sir Alexander Cunningham, who also made a special study of the coinage of the Hindu states of medieval India1. LITERARY ANTIQUARIES 'A literary antiquary' has been described by Isaac D'Israeli as 'that idler whose life is passed in a perpetual voyage autour de ma chambre; fervent in sagacious diligence, instinct with the enthusiasm of curious inquiry, critical as well as erudite; he has to arbitrate between contending opinions, to resolve the doubtful, to clear up the obscure, and to grasp at the remote; so busied with other times, and so interested for other persons than those about him, that he becomes the inhabitant of the visionary world of books.'2 One of the foremost places among the literary and historical antiquaries of England is due to Thomas Wright, of Trinity college, Cambridge, who, in 1838, was associated with John Mason Neale, and with the Irish antiquary, Thomas Crofton Croker, in founding the Camden society. The society was founded in honour of William Camden, author of Britannia (1586); and it had for its purpose the printing of books and documents connected with the early civil, ecclesiastical and literary history of the British empire. Wright was further associated, in 1840, with Croker, and with Alexander Dyce, J. O. Halliwell(-Phillipps) and John Payne Collier, in founding the Percy society for publishing old ballads and lyrical pieces, 1 For further publications, see bibliography. 2 Curiosities of Literature, vol. In, p. 493, ed. 1866.

E. L. XII. CH. XV.

23354

Literary4 Antiquaries

[CH.

so named in memory of Thomas Percy, bishop of Dromore, the first editor of Reliques of English Poetry (1765). Even in his undergraduate days, Wright was an eager explorer of historic manuscripts in the Cambridge libraries. In 1836, he published four volumes of Early English Poetry, and, two years later, A Series of Original Letters, illustrating the history of queen Elizabeth and her times. In 1840 he edited, with notes and glossary, The Vision and Creed of Piers Plowman, and, in 1842, produced his Biographia Literaria of the Anglo-Saxon period, comprising 'a rich mass of materials, arranged with taste and judgment.' This was followed, two years later, by his Anecdota Literaria, a collection of short poems in English, Latin and French, illustrating the literature and history of England in the thirteenth century. Among his many other works were essays on subjects connected with the literature, popular superstitions and history of England in the middle ages; a history of domestic manners and sentiments, and of caricature and grotesque in literature and art, besides editions of Chaucer, and of the romance of king Arthur and the knights of the Round Table. An Account of the Public Records was published in 1832 by Charles Purton Cooper, who also prepared a catalogue of the fine collection of old French law which he presented to the library of Lincoln's inn. The labours of John Bruce, as calendarer of state papers, and as editor for the Camden society (1838-68), are noticed elsewherel. Anecdotes and Traditions, relating to early English history and literature, was published for the same society by William John Thorns, who founded Notes and Queries in 1849, and edited Stow's Survey of London in 1875. In 1834 the Surtees society was founded in honour of Robert Surtees, author of a History of Durham published between 1816 and 1840. The purpose of the society was the publication of ancient manuscripts bearing on the history and topography of northern England. Among its active members were the brothers James and John Raine; canon Greenwell, who published several works connected with the antiquities of the county and bishopric of Durham; and George William Kitchin, late dean of Durham, who, in the early part of his career, had prepared the catalogue of the library of Christ Church, Oxford. The ten years from 1834 to 1844 were, in a special sense, the age of the birth of book-clubs and book-societies. Thus, the Camden society, already mentioned, was founded in 1838; and the 1 Cf. vol. xIII.xv]

Eng/and

355

year 1840 saw the foundation of the Parker society, which had for its main object 'the reprinting, without abridgment, alteration, or omission, of the best works of the Fathers and early Writers of the Reformed Church, published... between the accession of Edward VI and the death of Elizabeth.' The fifty-three volumes published by the society ended with a general index in 1855. The Percy and Shakespeare societies were founded in the same year, and the Aelfric and Chetham societies in 1842. Of the last two, the former had for its object the publication of Old English and other documents illustrating the early state of England; the latter, the printing of 'remains, historical and literary, connected with the Palatine Counties of Lancaster and Chester.' The Caxton society, founded in 1844, aimed at bringing out works 'illustrative of the history and miscellaneous literature of the Middle Ages.' The Sydenham society, founded in memory of the English physician Thomas Sydenham, lasted from 1844 to 1858, when it was succeeded by the New Sydenham society. The Hakluyt society, for printing rare and unpublished voyages and travels, was founded in 1846; the Early English Text society in 1864; the Ballad and the Chaucer society in 1868; the Harleian in 1869; the Wyclif in 1882; the Oxford Historical society in 1882; the Selden society, for publishing ancient legal records, in 1887; the London Bibliographical society and the Viking club in 1892; and the Navy records society in 1897. The Scottish book-clubs will be duly mentioned in the sequel. One of the most generous contributors to the Scottish, as well as the English, book-clubs of the middle of the nineteenth century, was the scholarly and accomplished bibliographer, Beriah Botfield1. A project for a Corpus Historicurn of early English history was formed by Henry Petrie, keeper of the records in the Tower. One large volume was published in 1848, with a preface by Sir Thomas Duffus Hardy, who had been trained under Petrie, and had already edited the Close Rolls, the Patent Rolls, the Rotuli de oblatis et finibus, the Rotuli Normanniae, the Chester Rolls, the Liberate Rolls and Modus Tenendi Parliamentum (1846). His Descriptive catalogue of materials relating to the history of Great Britain and Ireland filled three volumes. He edited William of Malmesbury, continued John Le Neve's Fasti Ecclesiae Anglicanae, compiled an English syllabus of documents in Rymer's Foedera and wrote memoirs of Henry Bickersteth, Lord Langdale. 1 A list of his contributions will be found in the bibliography, v b. 23-2356

Literary Antiquaries

[CH.

Lord Langdale was succeeded as master of the rolls by Sir John Romilly, who held office from 1851 to 1873. It was under his authority that the celebrated Rolls series came into being. Early in the nineteenth century, at a meeting held at Spencer house, it had been resolved to recommend the publication of a complete collection of the sources of English history to the age of the reformation. Henry Petrie had drawn up a scheme for the approval of the government, and had been subsequently appointed editor of the proposed series. But the standard which he had set up was unduly high, and the scheme had been left in abeyance by his death. However, in November 1856, Joseph Stevenson, the archivist, who had been sub-commissioner of public records from 1834 to 1839, brought the subject under the consideration of the lords of the treasury. His representations were referred to the master of the rolls, who, on 26 January 1857, submitted proposals for the publication of a series entitled Chronicles and Memorials of Great Britain and Ireland from the Invasion of the Romans to the Reign of Henry VIII. The proposals were adopted, and the publication of the proposed series was authorised under certain conditions: (1) that the works selected should be published without mutilation or abridgment; (2) that the text should be formed on a collation of the best manuscripts; and (3) that the editor should give an account of the manuscripts used by him, a brief notice of the age in which the author wrote, and an explanation of any chronological difficulties. This enterprise has done more towards supplying a sound foundation for an accurate knowledge of medieval history than all preceding efforts put together1. Among the many literary antiquaries who made their mark as editors of some of the volumes in this great series may be mentioned John Sherren Brewer, Henry Richards Luard and (above all) James Gairdner. The Historia Minor of Matthew Paris was edited for the Rolls series in 1866-9 by Sir Frederic Madden, head of the department of MSS in the British Museum from 1837 to 1866. He also edited Layamon's Brut in 1847, and Silvestre's Universal Palaeography, three years later. Three volumes of the Chronica Monasterii de Melsa, in the Rolls series, and four volumes of facsimiles of Old English charters, from 672 to the conquest, were edited by Sir Edward Bond, who was principal librarian of the British Museum from 1878 to 1888. In 1873, he took part in founding the Palaeographical society in 1 Cf. Gardiner and Mullinger's Introduction to the Study of English History (1881), pp. 219 f. See, also, post, vol. xiii.xv]

England

357

conjunction with his successor in the office of principal librarian. A transcript of The Register of the Company of Stationers of London, from 1554 to 1640, was published in 1875 by Edward Arber, who also edited The Term Catalogues, the seven volumes entitled An English Garner, The English Scholar's Library and the handy series issued under the title English Reprints. The biographical and historical antiquities of Cambridge were the field of research selected by Charles Henry Cooper, for many years town clerk of Cambridge. His minute and painstaking Annals of Cambridge appeared in four volumes in 1842-53, while a fifth volume bringing the work down to 1850-6, with an index to the whole, was added in 1908. The two volumes of his Athenae Cantabrigienses, published in 1858 and 1861, supplied materials for the lives of a large number of graduates of the university, the first and second volumes including those who died from 1500 to 1585, and from 1586 to 1609, respectively. The last work which he produced in his lifetime was Memorials of Cambridge, illustrated by Le Keux and Robert Farren. His Memoir of Margaret Countess of Richmond and Derby was edited in 1874 by John Mayor, who appears to have tacitly contributed more than half of the contents of the volume. In the course of an obituary notice, written on 21 March 1866, the day of the Cambridge antiquary's death, Mayor said of Cooper: It was because he clung with fond reverence to our ' Sparta,' whose every stone spoke to him of struggles and sacrifices and noble memories, that he 'adorned it as no gownsman has done. Sir Alexander Boswell, son of the biographer of Dr Johnson, became a member of the Roxburghe club in 1819, and set the example of printing the kind of books afterwards promulgated with much success by Scottish book-clubs. In 1816-18 he printed, at his private press at Auchinleck, works such as Churchyard's Myrrour of man, and George Whetstone's Remembraunce of the Life of Sir Nicolas Bacon. The greatest of the record-scholars produced by Scotland was Thomas Thomson, principal clerk of session from 1828 to 1852. Sir Walter Scott says of him in a letter to George Ellis: 'He understands more of old books, old laws, and old history, than any man in Scotland.' He edited The Scots Acts and other documents for the Record commission, but, by reason of either fastidiousness or indolence, he never prepared the introductory volume, for which he had during many years collected materials. The publication of Popular Ballads and Songs, from tradition, manuscripts and scarce editions, by358 Literary Antiqzaries [CH. Robert Jamieson, in Edinburgh, in 1806, was described by Scott as having 'opened a new discovery respecting the original source of the Scottish Ballads.' The author was afterwards associated with Henry Weber and Scott in Illustrations of Northern Antiquities (1814). Sir Walter Scott was the first president of the Bannatyne club, founded in 1823 in memory of George Bannatyne, who wrote out in 1568 a vast collection of Scottish poems in a folio volume of 800 pages, now preserved in the Advocates' library, in Edinburgh2. Scott was president of the club until his death in 1832; two years later, the Abbotsford club was founded in his memory, for printing and publishing historical works connected with his writings, and twenty-five works were thus produced from 1835 to 18643. Scott's place as president of the Bannatyne club was filled for the next twenty years by Thomas Thomson, mentioned above. The first and only secretary, from its inauguration in 1823 to its dissolution in 1861, was David Laing. ' It was a remarkable trio,' says David Murray in his monograph on Laing: 'they were the three men of the day most conversant with the literature of Scotland; each an accomplished antiquary...; all were distinguished in sagacity, shrewdness, and geniality; but Thomson lacked the exactness, method, energy, and business capacity of the other two4.' Laing, who was a learned bookseller and, from 1837 to his death in 1878, keeper of the library of the Writers to the Signet, Edinburgh, edited a large number of works of Scottish poetry and prose5. One of Laing's contemporaries, James Maidment, a Londoner who spent a large part of his life in Edinburgh, printed some rare tracts on the history and antiquities of Scotland (1822), and edited works for the Bannatyne, Maitland, Abbotsford and Hunterian clubs, as well as for the Spottiswoode society. Of these, the Maitland club, founded at Glasgow in 1828, for the publication of works illustrating the antiquities, history and literature of Scotland, produced seventy-five volumes, in little more than 1 'Introductory Remarks on Popular Poetry,' p. 549 b of Poetical Works, ed. 1865. 2 The entire text of the manuscript was issued by the Hunterian club, founded in Glasgow in 1871 for reproducing the works of Scottish writers of the Elizabethan age; it continued its activity until 1902. 3 List in Terry, C. S., Catalogue of publications of Scottish Historical Societies and kindred Clubs (Glasgow, 1909). 4 David Murray, 'David Laing, Antiquary and Bibliographer,' in The Scottish Historical Review, July 1914; separately printed in 1915. 5 See bibliography.xv]

Scotland

359

thirty years, while the Spottiswoode society, founded in memory of John Spottiswoode, archbishop of St Andrews, published his History of the Church and State of Scotland (1655 f.) in 1851. On the other side, the presbyterian History of the Sufferings of the Church of Scotland from Restoration to Revolution, written by Robert Wodrow, was published in 1828-30. The Wodrow society was founded in his honour at Edinburgh in 1841, and continued to flourish until about 1850, as an organisation mainly devoted to the history of presbyterianism. In the Fasti Ecclesiae Scoticanae, a work of wonderful accuracy and completeness, Hew Scott supplied a list (with biographical details) of the ministers of every parish in Scotland from the reformation to 1871. The Scottish text society was founded in 1882. The editorial work that had been left unfinished by the dilatory and fastidious Thomas Thomson was taken up after his death by Cosmo Innes, a man of singular charm and geniality, who filled the chair of constitutional law in Edinburgh from 1846 to his death in 1874. His style was lucid and engaging, and the object of his latest publication, Lectures on Scotch legal antiquities, was 'to lead the student of law from the daily practice of his profession to the historical and archaeological conditions connected with its technicalities.'l He also did a vast amount of work for the Bannatyne, Maitland and Spalding clubs. This last, so named after John Spalding, of Aberdeen (fl. 1650), author of The History of... Scotland...fro 124 to 1645, was founded, in 1839, for publishing the historical, genealogical, topographical and literary remains of the north-east counties of Scotland. Dissolved in 1870, it was revived as the New Spalding club in 1886. One of the principal founders of the original club was Joseph Robertson, who edited eight of its thirty-eight volumes. Robertson, whose comparatively short life of fifty-six years was outspanned by that of Cosmo Innes, was one of the most erudite and accurate of the antiquaries of Scotland. He was curator of the historical department of the Edinburgh Register house from 1853 to his death in 1866, and edited the Statuta Ecclesiae Scoticanae (1864), and many other volumes for the above-mentioned clubs, notably Illustrations of the Topography and Antiquities of the Shires of Aberdeen and Banff (1843-62). 'It is in the Scotch book-clubs,' says John Hill Burton, in his BookHunter, 'that Joseph Robertson has had the opportunity of exercising those subtle powers of investigation and critical acumen, peculiarly his own, which 1 The Athenaeum, no. 2358.360

Literary Antiquaries

[CH.

have had a perceptible and substantial effect in raising archaeology out of that quackish repute which it had long to endure under the name of antiquarianism.'1 Sir Archibald Campbell Lawrie, before becoming a judge in Ceylon from 1892 to 1901, produced admirable examples of antiquarian work in his Early Scottish Charters prior to 1153, and in his Annals of Malcolm and William. His Index to the Scots Acts is an enormous folio, methodically arranged and practically forming an index to the history of Scotland. In Ireland, Thomas Crofton Croker's Researches in the South of Ireland (1824) were followed by his Fairy Legends and Traditions, his Legends of the Lakes, and his Popular Songs (1839). John O'Donovan, who has been described as 'probably the greatest native Irish scholar who ever lived,' obtained an appointment in the Record office in 1826 and in the ordnance survey in 1829, and devoted his whole life to the elucidation of Irish history, topography and antiquities. Besides providing a Grammar of the Irish Language (1845), he ably edited and annotated a series of important texts, culminating in his monumental edition of The Annals of... the Four Masters (1848-51). The rest of his life was spent on the preliminary labours required for the herculean task of editing The Ancient Laws of Ireland2. His colleague in the ordnance survey, and his connection by marriage, Eugene O'Curry, was professor of Irish history and archaeology in the catholic university of Ireland. O'Curry's lectures entitled Manuscript Materials for Ancient Irish History, and Manners and Customs of the Irish, are 'still indispensable to all serious students of the past of Ireland.'3 Sir Samuel Ferguson, whose eminent services to Irish antiquities were recognised by his appointment in 1867 as the first deputy-keeper of the public records of Ireland, was knighted eleven years later for his successful reorganisation of the records department. As an Irish poet, he aimed at embodying in modern poetry the old Irish tales of heroes and saints and histories of places. His Ogham inscriptions in Ireland, Wales, and Scotland was edited in 1887 by Lady Ferguson. James Henthorn Todd, who became librarian of Trinity college, Dublin, in 1852, classified the 1 The Book-Hunter (1862); ' Some Book-Club Men.' 2 Cf. Macalister, R. A. S., in The Journal of the Ivernian Society, vol. v (1912-13), pp. 31, 83 f. 3 Ibid. p. 84.xv]

Ireland

361

manuscripts and compiled a catalogue, founded the Archaeological society in 1840, acted as its secretary and contributed to its publications and, finally, published his masterpiece, St Patrick, Apostle of Ireland (1864). William Reeves, who ultimately became bishop of Down, Connor and Dromore, published Ecclesiastical Antiquities of Down and Connor in 1847, and, ten years later, elaborately edited for the Irish Archaeological and Celtic society, and for the Bannatyne club, The Life of St Columba by Adamnan. The Irish Archaeological society, founded in 1840, has had for its occasional collaborators several clubs of kindred objects, the Ossianic, the Iona and the Celtic. Of these, the Iona was founded in 1833, while the Celtic, founded in 1845, was merged in the Irish Archaeological society in 1853. Patrick Weston Joyce, principal of the training college, Dublin, was also a commissioner for the publication of Ancient Laws of Ireland. His love of Irish songs and of folk-music bore fruit in his Ancient Irish Music (1882), Irish Music and Song and Irish Peasant Songs in the English Language (1909). It also led him to many lonely places, where he collected half-forgotten local names, and thus prepared himself for the production of what may, probably, prove to be the most permanent of his works, The Origin and History of Irish Names of Places (1869, etc.). Of his various histories of Ireland, which were familiar as household words in his own land and among his countrymen in the colonies, the most important was The Social History of Ancient Ireland (1893)1. The historical antiquary, Sir John Thomas Gilbert, secretary to the public record office of Ireland from 1867 to 1875, wrote Celtic Records and Historic Literature of Ireland (1861), and edited Historic and Municipal Documents of Ireland from the Archives of the City of Dublin (1870), as well as Facsimiles of the iNational Manuscripts of Ireland (1874-1880). These last have been recognised as equally interesting in their historic, palaeographic and artistic aspects2. Whitley Stokes, who had studied Irish philology from an early age, returned to England in 1882 after a legal career of twenty years in India. He took part in editing a series of Irish and Celtic texts, and was associated with John Strachan in Thesaurus Palaeo-Hibernicus (1901-3). Robert Atkinson, successively I An early copy of his Old Celtic Romances (1879), sent to Tennyson by Alfred Perceval Graves, inspired the poet laureate in The Voyage of Maeldune. 2 Cf. a later volume.362

Bib/iographers

[CH.

professor of Romance languages and of Sanskrit in Trinity college, Dublin, was also familiar with Tamil, Telegu, Hebrew, Persian, Arabic, Chinese, Celtic and Coptic. He edited the NormanFrench poem, La Vie de Seint Auban, The Book of Leinster, The Book of Ballymote, a collection of pieces, prose and verse, in the Irish language, and a middle Irish work, The Passions and Homilies from the Leabhar Breac (1897). In the following year, he was joint editor of two volumes of the Irish Liber Hymnorumt BIBLIOGRAPHERS Bibliography has been defined as 'the systematic description and history of books, their authorship, publication, editions, etc.' It is only the handmaid of literature; it cannot be identified with literature any more than the bibliographer (as such) can be regarded as an author. But, although bibliography has only an ancillary position, it has, nevertheless, a lofty aim. The bibliographer aims at completeness; he dares not make any invidious selection; of his domain, it may be said, as of the grave, that 'the small and great are there'; and works of comparatively slight importance have an undoubted right to his recognition. In fact, the only way in which he can conscientiously escape from this obligation is by labelling his list a 'select bibliography.' The author, on the other hand, must always be making a selection out of all the possible words which he may use; and, against breaking this law of selection, he is sufficiently warned by the proverb: tout dire est rien dire. Sometimes, however, a bibliographer may produce a work which may rank as literature. A Dibdin may write a romance on bibliomania, and an Andrew Lang, who himself describes bibliography as 'the quaint duenna of literature,' may discourse on it with all his wonted charm; but bibliographers, as such, are not authors, and it is only because of their loyal services to letters that they can claim a place in these pages. The importance of a first-hand knowledge of books has been recognised by all bibliographers worthy of the name. It was the leading principle which guided Joseph Ames, a native of Yarmouth and a prosperous inhabitant of Wapping, in preparing the materials for his account of printing in England from 1471 to 1600. Discarding printed lists, and resorting to the title-pages of the books themselves, he also secured the direct cooperation of others in gathering information respecting the 215 English printers with whom he proposed to deal. He thus succeeded in producing his Typographical Antiquities (1749).xv]

England

363

One of the first of English bibliographers, both in order of time and in talent, was Samuel Paterson, bookseller and auctioneer. We are told that 'his talent at cataloguizing was unrivalled'; and that 'perhaps we never had a bookseller who knew so much of the contents of books generally.' We also learn that his catalogues were masterly, and, some of them, perfect models of their kind. He was on terms of intimacy with his older contemporary, Dr Johnson, who has himself a fair claim to be regarded as a bibliographer. He took part in cataloguing the Harleian library in 1742. In the preface to this work he observes that 'by means of Catalogues only can it be known, what has been written on every part of Learning.' 'The philosopher's curiosity,' he adds elsewhere, 'may be influenced by a catalogue of the works of Boyle or of Bacon, as Themistocles was kept awake by the trophies of Miltiades.' Johnson, as he says of Pope, 'certainly was, in his early life, a man of great literary curiosity'; and he understood the whims and foibles of the bibliophile and collector. 'In the purchase of old books,' he remarks, 'let me recommend to you to inquire with great caution whether they are perfect.'2 He approved of the famous collection of editions of Horace by James Douglas, whose catalogue was ultimately published in 1739; and he adds: 'Every man should try to collect one book in that manner, and present it to a public library.' William Beloe, a pupil of Samuel Parr, and a graduate of Corpus Christi college, Cambridge, produced, in 1806-12, six volumes entitled Anecdotes of Literature and Scarce Books, in which he had the advantage of having a large number of rare works placed at his service by many eminent owners of libraries. Beloe's Sexagenarian, published in two volumes after his death, contains anecdotes of the author's literary contemporaries; but the notices of Porson are known to be inaccurate4. Bibliographia Poetiea, a catalogue of English poets of the twelfth to the sixteenth centuries, with a short account of their works, was published by Joseph Ritson in 1802. It was severely handled by Sir Samuel Egerton Brydges in his Censura Literaria. In allusion to Ritson's abusive, yet often just, Observations on Warton's History of English Poetry, he adds that, 'above all men, the late Laureat, whom this pitiable critic has loaded with the coarsest epithets, has taught us what use to make 1 The Adventurer, no. 81. 2 Croker's edn of Boswell, vol. III, p. 63. 3 Ibid. vol. vIII, p. 277; cf. David Murray's Bibliography: its Scope and Methods, Glasgow, 1915, pp. 3, 7, 8, 53, 54. 4 Many passages were omitted in the second edition published in 1818.364

Bibliographers

[CH.

of dark and forgotten materials.' Ritson's Select Collection of English Songs (1783 and 1813) won the praise of Sir Walter Scott, who, however, describes his Collection of all the Songs etc. on Robin Hood (1795, etc.), as a notable illustration of the excellences and defects of his system2. He was a laborious and accurate investigator, but there was an almost morbid bitterness in his criticisms of other men's labours. His place in the literary world is thus summed up in The Pursuits of Literature: In Theron's form, mark Ritson next contend; Fierce, meagre, pale, no commentator's friend3. Scott, in his song One Volume More, calls him 'as bitter as gall, and as sharp as a razor.' His critical powers were, however, well applied in his detection and exposure of the Ireland forgeries in 1795. Sir Samuel Egerton Brydges, 'a name to all the book-tribe dear,' produced, in the ten volumes of his Censura Literaria, of 1805-9 and 1815, 'titles, abstracts, and opinions of OLD ENGLISH BOOKS.' He also published The British Bibliographer (1810-14), and Restituita; or Titles, Extracts, and Characters of OLD BOOKS in English Literature Revived (1814-16). He printed a large number of rare Elizabethan texts at the private press of his son, Lee priory, near Canterbury. A literary interest of a wide range is represented by the discursive works of Isaac D'Israeli, entitled Curiosities and Amenities of Literature, and Calamities and Quarrels of Authors. Curiosities of Literature begins with essays on libraries and on bibliomania, and ends with the 'Life and Habits of a Literary Antiquary'; it also includes a passage, to our present purpose, in the chapter on the 'Bibliognoste': Many secrets we discover in bibliography.... Bibliography will show what has been done, and suggest to our invention what is wanted. Many have often protracted their journey in a road which has already been worn out by the wheels which had traversed it: bibliography unrolls the whole map of the country we propose travelling over-the post-roads and the by-paths. Of Calamities of Authors it was said by Southey: The matter is as amusing as any lover of light reading can desire, and of such a desultory kind that a comment might easily be made as extensive as the text4. The second series of Curiosities was published in 1823; and, ten 1 Vol. I (1805), p. 55. 2 See Scott's introductory remarks to his Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border, p. 549 a of Poetical Works, ed. 1865. 3 [Mathias, T. G.] See Dialogue i, 11. 245 f. 4 The Quarterly Review, vol. vIII (1812), p. 93.xv] Eng/ana 365 years later, Allan Cunningham said of these works in general that, 'while they shed abundance of light on the character and condition of literary men, and show us the state of genius in this land, they have all the attractions, for general readers, of the best romances." Among collectors of books a prominent place must be assigned to the duke of Roxburghe, whose books were ultimately sold in 10,120 lots on 18 May 1812, and on forty-five subsequent days. The excitement then produced by the competition between Lord Spencer and the future duke of Marlborough for the Valdarfer Boccaccio, printed at Venice in 1471, led to the formation of the Roxburghe club, with Lord Spencer as president and Dibdin as secretary. Much literary work of high value was accomplished by this club, when it had outgrown the pedantries in which it had been reared, and had come under the fostering care of the scholarly Beriah Botfield2, and had secured the services of men like Sir Frederic Madden, and Thomas Wright. In 1819 the duke of Marlborough's books were sold and the Boccaccio was now secured by Lord Spencer (who died in 1832), and thus passed, with the rest of the Althorp collection, into the hands of Mrs Rylands in 1892, and into the John Rylands library at Manchester, founded by her in 1899. 150,000 volumes were collected by Richard Heber, the halfbrother of bishop Reginald Heber, at a total expense of more than ~100,000, and were sold in 1834-7 for not much more than half that sum. From his very childhood he was an eager bookcollector; and, in his maturer years, as library after library was sold, he added to his stores the choicest treasures from the shelves of great collectors such as Richard Farmer, George Steevens, the duke of Roxburghe, Benjamin Heath, Malone and Sir Mark Masterman Sykes. On hearing that a curious book was for sale, he would himself enter a mail-coach and travel three, four, or five hundred miles to obtain it, fearful to entrust his commission to a letter. He had a library at Hodnet, a second in Pimlico, a third in Westminster, besides those at Oxford, Paris, Antwerp, Brussels, Ghent and other places in the Low Countries, and in Germany3. Heber knew his books, and was an expert bibliographer. He was the 'Atticus' of Dibdin's Bibliomania, and the friend of Scott, who has commemorated him in the introduction to the sixth canto of 1 Biographical and Critical History of British Literature of the last Fifty Years, Paris, 1834, p. 241, reprinted from The Athenaeum, 14 December 1833, p. 851. 2 See ante, p. 355. 3 The Gentleman's Magazine, January 1834.366 Bibliographers [CH. Marmion. He was also a generous lender of rare volumes to needy scholars and black-letter editors. In 1809 John Ferriar, of Manchester, who, in his Illustrations of Sterne, 'has traced our author through the hidden sources whence he borrowed most of his striking and peculiar expressions,'1 addressed to Richard Heber a poetical epistle entitled Bibliomania, large portions of which are quoted by Dibdin, who borrowed the name as the title of his own amusing and instructive romance. Here is one of these quotations: At ev'ry auction, bent on fresh supplies, He cons his catalogue with anxious eyes: Where'er the slim Italics mark the page, Curious and rare his ardent mind engage. (1. 29) It was in 1802 that Thomas Frognall Dibdin published the first edition of his Introduction to the Greek and Latin Classics. This was followed, in 1809, by the first issue of his Bibliomania, a small octavo volume of 87 pages, an enlarged edition of which appeared in 1811, with A Bibliographical Romance added to the former title, while a third edition, that of 1842, includes a key to the several characters in the story. On receiving a copy of the second edition, Isaac D'Israeli wrote to the author: 'I have not yet recovered from the delightful delirium into which your Bibliomania has completely thrown me.' After fully describing the various symptoms of the form of madness known as bibliomania, the author suggests several cures for the disease, the fifth and last being the study of bibliography. The first edition of Dibdin's Bibliomania was followed by the four volumes of his enlarged edition (1810-19) of Ames's Typographical Antiquities, already mentioned2. Dibdin was librarian to Lord Spencer, at Althorp, and, in that capacity, prepared Bibliotheca Spenceriana. The four volumes of this catalogue, published in 1814, were soon followed by a supplement in 1815, by the two volumes entitled Aedes Althorpianae, being a description of the house and its artistic treasures (1822), and, finally, by a seventh volume, containing the catalogue of the Cassano library. The author, in reviewing the result of his endeavours, has the satisfaction of adding: I have done every thing in my power to establish, on a firm foundation, the celebrity of a library of which the remembrance can only perish with every other record of individual fame. 1 See Scott's Prefatory Memoir to Sterne in John Ballantyne's The Novelist's Library, vol. v (1823), pp. xvii f. 2 Ante, p. 362.xv]

England

367

Of the three royal octavo volumes entitled The Bibliographical Decameron, or Ten Days' Pleasant Discourse upon illuminated Manuscripts, and subjects connected with Early Engraving, Topography, and Bibliography (1817), Isaac D'Israeli wrote: 'The volumes not only exceed my expectation, but even my imagination.' Overtures were made for the re-publication of this beautifully illustrated work in France; but they were too late. The costly woodcuts, which had been executed for its production, had already been purposely destroyed by Dibdin and his friends, who had used them to feed the fire on a convivial occasion. In 1821 Dibdin published his Bibliographical, Antiquarian, and Picturesque Tour in France and Germany. Scott welcomed this 'splendid work' as 'one of the most handsome which ever came from the British Press.' Dibdin's Library Companion (1824) has been severely criticised by some, but has been more justly regarded by others as a work of considerable value. It was followed in 1827 by the fourth edition of his Introduction to the Greek and Latin Classics, and by an anonymous pamphlet entitled Bibliophobia: 'Remarks on the present languid and depressed state of Literature and the Book Trade' (1831), an entertaining, but, in some respects, melancholy work. His Reminiscences of a Literary Life, 'a store-house of biographical and bibliographical anecdote,' appeared in 1836, succeeded in 1838 by his Bibliographical, Antiquarian, and Picturesque Tour in the Northern Counties of England, a handsome work, but inferior to that on his tour in France and Germany. Dibdin must have been well content with the tribute paid him by Scott for the charm with which he had invested the dry details of bibliography: You have contrived to strew flowers over a path which, in other hands, would have proved a very dull one; and all Bibliomanes must remember you long, as he (sic) who first united their antiquarian details with good-humoured raillery and cheerfulness. The library of the duke of Sussex was catalogued in two splendid volumes (1827-39) by Thomas Joseph Pettigrew, who, apart from his publications on the history of medicine, produced in 1849 a Life of Lord Nelson, including upwards of six hundred letters and documents, then published for the first time. The keeper of the Lambeth manuscripts from 1837 to 1848 was Samuel Roffey Maitland, who published, in 1843, a list of some of the early printed books in that library, and, in 1845, an index of the English books printed before 1600. His historical productions are noticed elsewhere1. 1 See vol. xiiI.368

Bibliographers

[CH.

Memoirs of Libraries, together with a practical hand-book of library economy, was published in 1859 by Edward Edwards, who subsequently wrote Lives of the Founders of the British Museum (1870). The plan of the great reading-room of that Museum was first formed by Antonio (afterwards Sir Anthony) Panizzi, keeper of the printed books from 1837, and chief librarian from 1856 to 1866. In addition to many other public services, it was owing to Panizzi's personal influence that, in 1846, the bequest of the Grenville library was obtained for the Museum. Two bibliographical works of the highest importance were produced by a London bookseller, William Thomas Lowndes: (1) the four volumes of The Bibliographer's Manual of English Literature, 'containing an account of rare, curious, and useful books relating to Great Britain and Ireland, from the invention of printing, with bibliographical and critical notices, etc.,' the first systematic work of the kind published in England (1834); and (2) The British Librarian, or 'book-collector's guide to the formation of a library' (parts 1-11, 1839). The Bibliographer's Manual was enlarged, with revisions and corrections, and with interesting prefatory notes, in 1857-8, etc., by Henry George Bohn, whose own magnum opus was the Guinea Catalogue of old books (1841), filling nearly 2000 pages and describing 300,000 volumes. Among Bohn's many other undertakings was The Antiquarian Library of thirty-five volumes, including (apart from historical works of earlier date) George Ellis's Specimens of Early English Metrical Romances, Thomas Keightley's Fairy Mythology, Mallet's Northern Antiquities and Benjamin Thorpe's Yule-tide Stories. Bohn's Guinea Catalogue, vast as it was, was surpassed in size, though not in quality or character, by the seven volumes of Bernard Quaritch's General Catalogue of Old Books and MSS (1887-9; index, 1892). A bibliographical and critical account of the rarest books in the English language was supplied in the Notes on rare English Books, published in 1865 by John Payne Collier, who also printed Extracts from the Registers of the Stationers' Company for 1555-70, and edited The Roxburghe Ballads, as well as several works for the Camden, Percy and Shakespeare societies, and the two volumes entitled Shakespeare's Library (1843). In 1849 he published a large number of emendations of the text of Shakespeare from the 'Perkins folio,' which he presented to the duke of Devonshire, after whose death it was deposited in the British Museum in 1859, with the result that the marginal correctionsxv]

England

369

were proved to be modern fabrications. A catalogue of the MSS of the Chetham library, in Manchester, was produced in 1841-2 by James Orchard Halliwell(-Phillipps), who edited many works for the Camden, Percy and Shakespeare societies, and produced a magnificent edition of Shakespeare in twenty folio volumes, and facsimiles of the Shakespeare quartos. He also wrote several important works on the life of the poet, besides arranging and describing the archives of Stratford-on-Avon, and compiling A Dictionary of Archaic and Provincial Words, and A Dictionary of Old English Plays. Richard Copley Christie1 bequeathed to the university of Manchester a library rich in the literature of the revival of learning. Walter Arthur Copinger, long Christie's colleague at Manchester and, like him, a barrister in practice there, founded, in 1892, the London Bibliographical society, printed in the same year his Incunabula Biblica and published in 1895-8 his important supplement to Hain's Repertoriuzm Bibliographicum, in which 6832 works printed in the fifteenth century were added to the 16,311 registered by Hain. Three thousand incunabula (or early printed books) in the Bodleian were catalogued in 1891-3 by Robert Proctor, who included notes upon these in his Index of Early Printed Books in the British Museum (1898). He also prepared for the Bibliographical society in 1900 an illustrated monograph entitled The Printing of Greek in the Fifteenth Century. This able bibliographer met with a mysterious end in the Tyrol in 1903, and his Bibliographical Essays, which everywhere reveal the wide knowledge of an expert, were collected two years later. A useful Register of National Bibliography was produced in two volumes in 1905 by William Prideaux Courtney. A remarkable knowledge of bibliography was possessed by Henry Bradshaw, librarian of the Cambridge university library from 1867 to 1886. His 'Memoranda,' which are of special interest as indicating the processes by which advances in knowledge are made, are included in the Collected Papers published in 1889. A society for publishing rare liturgical tracts was founded in his memory in the following year. The book rarities in the university of Cambridge were reviewed with enthusiasm in 1829 by Charles Henry Hartshorne, who gives a complete list of Capell's Shakespeariana in the library of Trinity college. The fifteenth century printed books, and the English books printed before 1601, in Trinity college library, at Cambridge, were catalogued, 1 Cf. ante, p. 333.

E. L. XII. CH. XV.

24370

Bibliographers

[CH.

in 1876 and 1885, by the librarian, Robert Sinker, who also wrote a popular monograph on the library. The early English printed books in the university library (1475 to 1640), and the MSS in the college libraries, have likewise been catalogued. Among the bibliographers specially associated with Scotland, Sir Walter Scott was undoubtedly a sound bibliographer. It was on a plan of his own that his library was catalogued by his secretary; and (as already observed) he was president of the Bannatyne club from its foundation to the day of his death'. But the first great bibliographer of Scotland was Robert Watt, of Glasgow, who published A Catalogue of Medical Books during his lifetime (in 1812), and left behind him the materials for his great Bibliotheca Britannica, or a general Index to British and Foreign Literatuire, published in four volumes at Edinburgh in 1824, the first two containing the alphabetical list of authors (with their works), and the third and fourth an alphabetical classification of subjects. 'Dr Watt,' writes Isaac D'Israeli, 'may serve as a mortifying example of the length of labour and the brevity of life. To this gigantic work the patient zeal of the writer had devoted twenty years; he had just arrived at the point of publication when death folded down his last page; the son who, during the last four years, had toiled under the direction of his father, was chosen to occupy his place. The work was in the progress of publication, when the son also died; and strangers now reap the fruits of their combined labours.'2 The work has been justly described as 'a remarkable performance, despite of all its imperfections, and one in which Watt's name will live for centuries to come.'3 A catalogue of the law books in the Advocates' library, Edinburgh, was produced in 1831 by David Irving, author of Memoirs of... George Buchanan and Lives of Scotish Poets, and of The History of Scotish Poetry. The bibliographical erudition of Sir William Hamilton, professor of logic and metaphysics in Edinburgh, is clearly shown in the notes to his published works, such as Discussions on Philosophy and Literature of 1852-3, and his posthumous Lectures on Logic and Metaphysics. Augustus de Morgan held that Hamilton was not a bibliographer: 'he knew nothing but the insides of books'; but he suggested that a list of the books quoted in Hamilton's lectures on logic would form a good bibliography of the subject4. The American editor of his Philosophy regarded 'his erudition, both in its extent and in 1 Ante, p. 358. 2 Literary Miscellanies, p. 355, ed. 1867. Enc. Brit. vol. xXI, ed. 1860, p. 778. 4 Notes and Queries, 1864, p. 102 (quoted in David Murray's Bibliography, p. 53).xv]

Scotland

37'

its exactness,' as 'perfectly provoking '1; and a fellow-countryman, with all the instincts of a bibliographer, has more aptly said of him: Summing up the thousands upon thousands of volumes upon all matters of human study and in many languages, which he has passed through his hands, you think he has merely dipped into them or skimmed them, or in some other shape put theum to superficial use. You are wrong; he has found his way at once to the very heart of the living matter of each one; between it and him there are henceforth no secrets2. The Book-Hunter, a discursive volume describing the delights of book-collecting, was written by John Hill Burton, the publication of whose History of Scotland led to his appointment as historiographer royal for that country. A Scotsman who lived long in England, Andrew Lang, wrote a delightful volume, The Library (1881), besides discoursing on 'Elzevirs' and on 'Bibliomania in France' in his Books and Bookmen (1887). A Dictionary of Anonymous and Pseudonymous Literature of Great Britain was published in 1882-8 by Samuel Halkett, keeper of the Advocates' library (of which he planned the catalogue), and John Laing, librarian of the New college, Edinburgh, author of the excellent catalogue of its library. The religious history of the sixteenth century was the special province of Thomas Graves Law, keeper of the Signet library, Edinburgh, from 1876 to 1904, whose Collected Essays appeared in the latter year3. Finally, a new catalogue of the Glasgow university library (with an excellent subject-index) has been prepared by William Purdie Dickson, honorary curator of the library, and papers on the bibliography of chemistry and technology have been written by John Ferguson, of Glasgow, author of Bibliotheca Chemica (1906), Witchcraft Literature of Scotland, and Some Aspects of Bibliography with a list of special bibliographies in the appendix (1907)4. 1 Wight, O. W., transl. of Cousin's History of Modern Philosophy, vol. ii, p. 335, 1854. Cf. De Quincey's Essays, vol. v, pp. 314 f., ed. Masson. 2 Burton, John Hill, The Book-Hunter, pp. 77 f., ed. 1909. 3 As to John Hill Burton, Andrew Lang and T. G. Law, see a later volume of this History. 4 See, also, the bibliography of the present chapter.

24-2BIBLIOGRAPHIES CHAPTER I SIR WALTER SCOTT I. MANUSCRIPTS Scott's Journal and much of his correspondence are preserved privately at Abbotsford, as are also the collections of ballad versions which he utilised for Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border. In the Abbotsford library, which by his will is preserved intact as he left it, and is accessible for consultation on certain conditions, are a number of miscellaneous MSS and collections, including various translations of German dramas which he did not publish, and also his notes when a student at the class of Scots law. The original MSS of most of Scott's poems and novels are in existence, but the majority are now in the hands of private collectors. Of several MSS of the novels at one time in the possession of Ruskin, only that of The Fortunes of Nigel is now at Brantwood. In the British Museum is the MS of the most of Kenilworth; various letters of Scott to George Thomson, with verses for his Scottish Airs; the proofsheets of Woodstock with the author's corrections and additions; eighteen letters to James Ballantyne about the work, and Ballantyne's criticisms; a copy of The Life of Napoleon with MS corrections and notes by Scott; and a portion of an edition of Swift's Works used by Scott, with MS notes by him. The MSS of Marmion and Waverley are preserved in the Advocates' library, Edinburgh. Portions of Kenilworth and The Legend of Montrose, original correspondence and verses belonging to Scott and various letters from him, are included in the Laing collection in the university of Edinburgh. The publishing firm of A. & C. Black, London, possesses Scott's annotated edition of the Waverley novels, in 44 volumes, full of textual corrections by him; and bound up in vol. I are the MSS of the introductions, etc. published in the first collected edition. II. POETRY A. Collected Editions The Poetical Works of Walter Scott, with the Notes by the Author. 12 vols. Edinburgh, 1820. Poetical Works. 7 vols. Paris, 1821 and 1827. - 11 vols. Edinburgh, 1830. -Ed. Lockhart, J. L., with illustrations on steel from drawings by Turner, J. M. W. Edinburgh, 1833-4 and 1848. - Ed., with memoir and critical dissertation, by Gilfillan, G. 3 vols. Edinburgh, 1857. - The Globe edition, with a biographical and critical memoir by Palgrave, F. T. 1866, and later edns.CH. I] Sir Walter Scott 373 Poetical Works. With a critical memoir by Rossetti, W. M., and illustrations by Seccombe, T. 1870. With prefatory notice, biographical and critical, by Sharp, W. 2 vols. 1885-6. Ed. Minto, W. 2 vols. 1891-2. - Oxford complete edn. Ed. Robertson, J. L. 1904.  Ed. Lang, A. 1905. B. Separate Works The Chase and William and Helen: two ballads from the German of Gottfried A. Burger. [Anonymous.] Edinburgh and London, 1796. Apology for Tales of Terror. Kelso, 1799. [Only about 12 copies printed. Includes his Burger translations, and a few other ballads afterwards included in M. G. Lewis's Tales of Wonder, 1801.] The Eve of St John: a Border Ballad. Kelso, 1800. Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border. Vols. I and ii. Kelso, 1802. Vol. III. London and Edinburgh, 1803. [Includes original ballads by Scott and others.] 3rd and more complete edn. 1803. Various subsequent edns with changes and additional notes. Posthumous edn with additional notes by Lockhart, J. G. 1833. New edn with additional notes and various readings by Henderson, T. F. 4 vols. Edinburgh and New York, 1902. Rearranged edn with introduction by Noyes, A., in one vol. Edinburgh, 1908. The Lay of the Last Minstrel. 1805. 6th edn with notes. 1807. 8th edn with Ballads and Lyrical Pieces. Illustrated. 1808. Ballads and Lyrical Pieces. 1806. Marmion: a Tale of Flodden Field. 1808. The Lady of the Lake; a poem. Edinburgh, 1810. The Vision of Don Roderick. Edinburgh, 1811. Glenfinlas and other Ballads, with the Vision of Don Roderick. Edinburgh, 1812. Rokeby, a Poem. Edinburgh, 1813. The Bridal of Triermain; or the Vale of St John. Edinburgh, 1813. The Field of Waterloo; a Poem. Edinburgh, 1815. The Lord of the Isles; a Poem in six cantos. 1815. The Vision of Don Roderick, The Field of Waterloo and other poems. Edinburgh, 1815. The Ettricke Garland, being two excellent new songs [one by Scott and the other by Hogg, J.]. Edinburgh, 1815. Various songs in Select Collection of Original Scottish Airs for the Voice by Thomson, George, 6 vols., 1793-1811; and in Albyn's Anthology, ed. Campbell, A., 2 vols., Edinburgh, 1816 and 1818. Harold the Dauntless; a Poem in six cantos. Edinburgh, 1817. Ballad of the Noble Moringer. In The Edinburgh Annual Register. 1817. The Bridal of Triermain and Harold the Dauntless. Edinburgh, 1818. Miscellaneous Poems. Edinburgh, 1820. The Poetry contained in the Novels, Tales and Romances of the Author of Waverley. Edinburgh, 1822. Halidon Hill; a Metrical Romance in two acts. 1822. Macduff's Cross; a Dramatic Sketch. First published in Joanna Baillie's Collection of Poetical Miscellanies. 1822. Republished with the Doom of Devorgoil, Halidon Hill and Auchindrane, or the Ayrshire Tragedy. Edinburgh, 1830.374 Bibliography [CH. III. NOVELS A. Collected Editions Novels and Tales of the Author of Waverley. 16 vols. Edinburgh, 1821. 12 vols. Edinburgh, 1823. Historical Romances of the Author of Waverley. 8 vols. Edinburgh, 1822. 6 vols. Edinburgh, 1824. Novels and Romances of the Author of Waverley. 9 vols. Edinburgh, 1824. 7 vols. Edinburgh, 1825. Tales and Romances of the Author of Waverley. Illustrated edn with introductions and notes. 20 vols. Edinburgh, 1827-33. Another edn, 16 vols. Edinburgh, 1828-33. The Waverley Novels. Author's Favourite edn [illustrated with 96 steel plates]. 48 vols. Edinburgh, 1830-4. Cabinet edn. 25 vols. Edinburgh, 1841-3. - Abbotsford edn. [With many steel and wood engravings.] 12 vols. Edinburgh, 1842-7. - Library edn. 25 vols. 1852-3. - Illustrated Roxburghe edn. 48 vols. Edinburgh, 1859-61. - Centenary edn. Edinburgh, 1870-1. - dition de Luxe. 25 vols. 1882-98. - Dryburgh edn. 25 vols. 1890-1900. -- Border Illustrated edn. [With introductory essays and notes by Lang, A.] 48 vols. 1892-4, and later reprints. -- Oxford edn. 25 vols. Oxford, 1912. B. Separate Novels Waverley, or 'Tis Sixty Years Since. 3 vols. Edinburgh, 1814. Guy Mannering, or The Astrologer. By the Author of Waverley. 3 vols. Edinburgh, 1815. The Antiquary. By the Author of Waverley, and Guy Mannering. 3 vols. Edinburgh, 1816. Tales of My Landlord. Collected and arranged by Jedidiah Cleishbotham. [The Black Dwarf and Old Mortality.] 4 vols. Edinburgh, 1816. Tales of My Landlord. Second series [The Heart of Midlothian]. 4 vols. Edinburgh, 1818. Rob Roy. By the Author of Waverley. Edinburgh, 1818. Tales of My Landlord. Third series [The Bride of Lammermoor and The Legend of Montrose]. 4 vols. Edinburgh, 1819. Ivanhoe. A Romance. By the Author of Waverley. 3 vols. Edinburgh, 1820. The Monastery. A Romance. By the Author of Waverley. 3 vols. Edinburgh, 1820. The Abbot. Ry the Author of Waverley. 3 vols. Edinburgh, 1820. Kenilworth. A Romance. By the Author of Waverley. 3 vols. Edinburgh, 1821. The Pirate. By the Author of Waverley. 3 vols. Edinburgh, 1822. The Fortunes of Nigel. By the Author of Waverley. 4 vols. Edinburgh, 1822. Peveril of the Peak. By the Author of Waverley. 4 vols. Edinburgh, 1822. Quentin Durward. By the Author of Waverley. 3 vols. Edinburgh, 1823. St Ronan's Well. By the Author of Waverley. 3 vols. Edinburgh, 1824. Redgauntlet: a tale of the eighteenth century. By the Author of Waverley. 3 vols. Edinburgh, 1824.I] Sir Yalter Scott 375 Tales of the Crusades. [Vols. I and 11, The Betrothed; vols. iii and iv, The Talisman.] Edinburgh, 1825. Woodstock; or the Cavalier. A tale of the year sixteen hundred and fiftyone. By the Author of Waverley. 3 vols. Edinburgh, 1826. Chronicles of the Canongate [The Highland Widow; The Two Drovers; and The Surgeon's Daughter. With an introduction by Scott, acknowledging the authorship of the Waverley novels]. 2 vols. Edinburgh, 1827. Chronicles of the Canongate. Second series [St Valentine's Day; or The Fair Maid of Perth]. 3 vols. Edinburgh, 1828. Anne of Geierstein; or The Maiden of the Mist. By the Author of Waverley. 3 vols. 1829. Tales of My Landlord. Fourth and last series [Count Robert of Paris and Castle Dangerous]. 4 vols. 1832. IV. MISCELLANEOUS WORKS A. Collected Editions Miscellaneous Prose Works of Sir Walter Scott. 6 vols. Edinburgh, 1827. Introductions, Notes and Illustrations to the Novels, Tales and Romances of the Author of Waverley. 3 vols. 1833. The Miscellaneous Prose Works of Sir Walter Scott. 30 vols. 1834-71. [Includes his numerous contributions to The Edinburgh and Quarterly Reviews, etc.] The Miscellaneous Works of Sir Walter Scott, Bart. Edinburgh, 1836. [Introductory Remarks on Popular Poetry, prefixed to an edition of Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border; and the new introductions, etc., to his principal poetical romances.] B. Separate Works Goetz of Berlichingen, with the Iron Hand: a tragedy translated from the German of Goethe. 1799. The Eyrbiggia Saga. [Contributed to Weber's Northern Antiquities.] 1814. Essays on Chivalry and the Drama. Encyclopaedia Britannica. 1814. The Border Antiquities of England and Scotland. 2 vols. 1814-17. Paul's Letters to his Kinsfolk. Edinburgh, 1816. Provincial Antiquities of Scotland. In 10 parts, 1819-26, and in 2 vols. Edinburgh, 1826. Description of the Regalia of Scotland. 1819, and later edns. [Rptd from the Provincial Antiquities.] Lives of the Novelists, prefixed to Ballantyne's Novelists' Library. 1821-4. Published separately in 2 vols. Paris, 1825. Sketch of the Life and Character of the late Lord Kinneder. [Privately printed.] Edinburgh, 1822. Essay on Romance. Encyclopaedia Britannica. 1822. Thoughts on the proposed change of Currency. [Three letters to the Editor of the Edinburgh Weekly Journal from Malachi Malagrowther, Esqr.] Edinburgh, 1826. The Life of Napoleon Buonaparte, Emperor of the French. With a Preliminary view of the French Revolution. By the Author of Waverley. 9 vols. Edinburgh, 1827. Discourses of a Layman. 1828. [Two sermons written for a young preacher.] Tales of a Grandfather, being stories taken from Scottish History. Humbly inscribed to Hugh Littlejohn, Esqr. 3 vols. Edinburgh, 1828. Second series. 3 vols. Edinburgh, 1829.376

Bibliography

[CH.

History of Scotland. 2 vols. (Lardner's Cabinet Cyclopedia). 1829-30. Letters on Demonology and Witchcraft, addressed to J. G. Lockhart, Esqr. 1830. Tales of a Grandfather, being stories taken from the History of France. Inscribed to Master John Hugh Lockhart. 3 vols. Edinburgh, 1831. V. CORRESPONDENCE, ETC. Letters of Sir Walter Scott addressed to the Rev. R. Polwhele, D. Gilbert, Esqr., Francis Douse, Esq. 1823. Ellis, James. Letters between James Ellis, Esqr. and Walter Scott, Esqr. Newcastle-upon-Tyne, 1850. Coleorton, Memorials of. Letters of Scott to Sir George and Lady Beaumont of Coleorton. Ed. Knight, W. 2 vols. Edinburgh, 1887. Journal (1825-32). 2 vols. Ed. Douglas, David. Edinburgh, 1890. Familiar Letters. 2 vols. Ed. by Douglas, David. Edinburgh, 1894. VI. WORKS EDITED BY SIR WALTER SCOTT Sir Tristrem: a Metrical Romance of the Thirteenth century by Thomas of Ercildoune. Edited from the Auchinleck MS. Edinburgh, 1804. 4th edn. Edinburgh, 1819. Original Memoirs written during the Great Civil War: being the Life of Sir H. Slingsby and Memoirs of Captain Hodgson. With notes, etc. Edinburgh, 1806. The works of John Dryden now first collected. Illustrated with notes, historical, critical and explanatory, and a life of the author. 18 vols. 1808. [Fifty copies of the Life of Dryden were printed separately, 1808.] 2nd edn. 1821. New edn revised and corrected by Saintsbury, G. Edinburgh, 1882. Queenhoo Hall, a romance; and Ancient Time, a drama, by the late Joseph Strutt. 4 vols. Edinburgh, 1808. Memoirs of Capt. George Carleton written by himself. Edinburgh, 1808. Memoirs of Robert Carey, and Fragmenta Regalia: being a history of Queen Elizabeth's favourites, by Sir R. Naunton. Edinburgh, 1808. Somers's Collection of Tracts. 13 vols. 1809-15. The State Papers and Letters of Sir Ralph Sadler, ed. by Clifford, A. To which is added a memoir of the Life of Sir Ralph Sadler, with Historical Notes of Walter Scott, Esqr. 2 vols. Edinburgh, 1809. The Poetical Works of Anna Seward. With extracts from her literary correspondence. 3 vols. Edinburgh, 1810. Secret History of the Court of James the First. Edinburgh, 1811. The Works of Jonathan Swift, containing additional letters, tracts and poems not hitherto published. With notes and a life of the author. 19 vols. Edinburgh, 1814. 2nd edn, 19 vols. Edinburgh, 1824. The Letting of Humours Blood into the Head vaine. By S. Rowlands. Edinburgh, 1814. Memorie of the Somervilles. 2 vols. Edinburgh, 1815. Memorials of the Haliburtons. [Privately printed.] Edinburgh, 1820. Trivial Poems and Triolets by Patrick Carey. 1820. Northern Memoirs calculated for the Meridian of Scotland, by Richard Franck. Edinburgh, 1821. Chronological Notes of Scottish Affairs from 1680 till 1701; being chiefly taken from the Diary of Lord Fountainhall. Edinburgh, 1822.-1

N ~ TT ( 7 7 -

Ij oair W aiter Ccott 377 Military Memoirs of the Great Civil War, being the Military Memoirs of J. Gwynne; and an account of the Earl of Glencairn's Expedition. With an appendix. Edinburgh, 1822. Lays of the Lindsays, being Poems by the Ladies of the House of Balcarres. Edinburgh, 1824. [Suppressed.] Auld Robin Gray, a ballad. By the Rt Honourable Lady Anne Barnard, born Lady Anne Lindsay of Balcarres. (Bannatyne club.) Edinburgh, 1825. Memoirs of the Marchioness de la Rochejaquelin. Translated from the French. (Constable's Miscellany. Vol. v.) Edinburgh, 1827. Various Tracts in the Bannatyne Miscellany. 3 vols. Edinburgh, 1827-55. Memorials of George Bannatyne, 1545-1608. With a memoir. (Bannatyne club.) Edinburgh, 1829. Papers Relative to the Regalia of Scotland. (Bannatyne club.) Edinburgh, 1829. Proceedings in the Court Martial, held upon John Master of Sinclair. (Roxburghe club.) Edinburgh, 1831. Trial of Duncan Terig alias Clerk, and Alexander Bane Macdonald for the murder of Arthur Davis, serjeant in General Guise's Regiment of Foot. June A.D. 1754. Edinburgh, 1831. Memoirs of the Insurrection in 1715, by John Master of Sinclair (Abbotsford club). Edinburgh, 1858. VII. BIOGRAPHY AND CRITICISM Adolphus, J. L. Letters to Richard Heber containing critical remarks on the series of Novels beginning with Waverley. 1822. Agnoli, G. Gli Albori del romanzo storico in Italia e i primi imitatori di Walter Scott. 1906. Ainger, A. Scott. Lectures and Essays. Vol. I. 1905. Airy, Sir G. B. Topography of the Lady of the Lake. [Privately ptd.] 1872. Bagehot, W. The Waverley Novels. National Review. Vol. vi. 1858. Rptd in Literary Studies. Vol. II. 1879. 2nd edn. 1884. Ball, M. Sir Walter Scott as a critic of Literature. (Columbia University Studies in English.) New York, 1907. Ballantine, A. Refutations of the misstatements and calumnies contained in Mr Lockhart's Life of Sir Walter Scott, respecting the Messrs Ballantyne. 1838. Reply to Mr Lockhart's pamphlet, entitled The Ballantyne humbug handled. 1839. Ballantyne Press, The, and its connection with Sir Walter Scott. 1879. Ballantyne Press, The, and its Founders. 1909. Bates, W. The Maclise Portrait-Gallery of Illustrious Literary Characters. 1883. Bernays, 3I. Beziehungen Goethes zu Walter Scott. In Zur neueren Literaturgeschichte. Stuttgart, 1895. [Vol. I.] Blumenhagen, K. Sir Walter Scott als Ubersetzer. Diss. Rostock, 1900. Bouchier, J. A Waverley Mozaic. 1898. Brandes, G. Main Currents of Nineteenth Century Literature. Vol. Iv. Naturalism in England. 1905. Brooke, S. A. Studies in Poetry. 1907. Bryant, W. C. Orations and Addresses. 1873. Buonaparte, Louis. R6ponse a Sir WValter Scott sur sa vie de Napoleon. Paris, 1827.378 Bibliography [CH. Byron, Lord. Letters and Journals, ed. Prothero, R. E. 6 vols. 1898-1901. Canning, Hon. A. S. G. Philosophy of the Waverley Novels. 1879. History in Fact and Fiction. 1897. History in Scott's Novels. 1905. 2nd edn. 1907. Sir Walter Scott studied in eight novels. 1910. Carlyle, T. Sir Walter Scott. Westminster Review. Vol. xxvIII. 1838. Rptd in Collected Essays. Chambers's Cyclopedia of English Literature. Vol. iII. Sir Walter Scott, by Ker, W. P. Chambers's Encyclopedia. Scott, by Lang, A. Chambers, R. Illustrations of the author of Waverley; being notices and anecdotes of real characters and incidents supposed to be described in his works. Edinburgh, 1825, and later edns. - Biographical Dictionary of Eminent Scotsmen. 4 vols. Glasgow, 1832-4, and later edns. [Vol. iv.] - Life of Sir Walter Scott. Edinburgh, 1834. 3rd edn, with Abbotsford notanda on Sir Walter Scott and his factor by Carruthers, R. London, 1871. Channing, W. E. Analysis of the Character of Napoleon, suggested by Scott's Life of Napoleon. 1828. Chorley, H. F. The authors of England. A series of medallion portraits, 1838. New edn. 1861. Cochrane, J. G. Catalogue of the Library at Abbotsford. (Bannatyne club.) Edinburgh, 1838. Cockburn, H. T. Lord. Life of Lord Jeffrey. 2 vols. Edinburgh, 1852. - Memorials of his Time. Edinburgh, 1856. - Journal (1831-54). Edinburgh, 1871. Constable, T. Archibald Constable and his Literary Correspondents. 3 vols. 1873. Cornish, S. W. The Waverley Manual. Edinburgh, 1871. Courthope, W. J. The Liberal Movement in English Literature. 1885. H istory of English Poetry. Vol. III. 1910. Crockett, W. S. The Scott Country. Edinburgh, 1902, 1905 1911, - Footsteps of Scott. Edinburgh, 1907. -The Scott Originals. Edinburgh, 1912. Crockett, W. S. and Caw, T. L. Sir Walter Scott (Bookman Biographizes v). 1903. Croker, J. W. See Jennings, L. J. Cross, W. L. Development of the English Novel. New York and Londoi; 1899. Cunningham, Allan. Biographical and Critical History of the British Literature of the last fifty years. Paris, 1834. Des Granges, Ch. M. Le Romantisme et la Critique. La Presse litteaire sous la Restauration, 1815-30. Paris, 1907. Dickson, N. The Bible in Waverley. Edinburgh, 1884. Dotti, AI. Delle derivazioni nei Promessi sposi di A. Manzoni dai Ronal:zi di Walter Scott. Pisa, 1900. Du roman historique en France et en Angleterre. REev-we briuanlique. Nov. 1834. Eastman, C. W. Wilhelm Hauff's Lichtenstein (compared with Ivanhoe). Amer. Germanica, III-I. 1890-1900. Eberty, Felix. Walter Scott. Ein Lebensbild. 2 vols. Breslau, 1860, 1871L Elliot, Col. F. Trustworthiness of the Border Ballads. Edinburgh, 1 906. Further Essays on the Border Ballads. Edinburgh, 1910. Elton, O. Survey of English Literature (1780-1830). 2 vols. 1912.I] Sir [Yalter Scott 379 Elze, Karl. Sir Walter Scott. Dresden, 1864. F. The Waverley anecdotes. 1833. New edn. 1887. Findlay, J. P. Sir Walter Scott, the Great Unknown. [1912.] F., W. J. [FitzPatrick, W. J.] Who wrote the earlier Waverley Novels? 1856. Revised edn. 1856. Franke, P. W. Der Stil in den epischen Dichtungen Walter Scotts. Berlin, 1909. Freeman, E. Norman Conquest. Note 2nd (on Ivanhoe) in Appendix. 1867-79. French, G. J. An inquiry into the origin of the authorship of some of the earlier Waverley Novels. Boston, 1856. Froude, J. A. Life of Thomas Carlyle. Various edns. Fyfe, W. G. Edinburgh under Sir Walter Scott. Edinburgh, 1906. Gaebel, C. Beitrage zur Technik der Erzihlung in den Romanen Walter Scotts. 1901. Gibson, J. Reminiscences of Sir Walter Scott. Edinburgh, 1871. Gilfillan, G. Life of Sir Walter Scott. Edinburgh, 1870. 2nd edn. 1871. Gillies, R. P. Recollections of Sir Walter Scott. London, 1837. Gleig, S. R. The Life of Sir Walter Scott. Edinburgh, 1871. Goethe, J. W. von. Conversations with Eckermann. Various edns. Gottschall, R. von. Die deutsche Nationallitteratur des 19. Jahrhunderts. Leipzig, 1872. [Vol. Iv.] Gourgaud, General. R6futation de la vie de Napoleon par Sir Walter Scott. Paris, 1827. Grant, G. Life of Sir Walter Scott. 1849. Grey, H. Key to the Waverley Novels. 1881, 1899. Hallays, A. W. Scott et le romantisme frangais. Journal des D6bats. 26 July 1898. Hannay, D. Glimpses of the Land of Scott. Illustrated by Macwhirter, J. 1887. Hay, J. Sir Walter Scott. 1899. Hazlitt, W. The Spirit of the Age. 1825. Works. Edd. Waller, A. R. and Glover, A. Vol. Iv. 1902. Henderson, P. A. W. Letters of SirWalter Scott's family to their governess. 1905. Herford, C. H. The Age of Wordsworth. 1897, and later edns. Highland Lady, Memoirs of a (1797-1833). 1898. Hogg, James. The Domestic Manners and Private Life of Sir Walter Scott. Glasgow, 1834. Edinburgh, 1882,1909. M- emorials of. Ed. Mrs Garden. 3rd edn. Paisley, 1904. Howells, W. 0. Criticism and Fiction. 1891. Howitt, W. Homes and Haunts of the most eminent British Poets. 1849. 3rd edn. 1857. Hudson, W. H. Sir Walter Scott. 1901. Hughes, Mrs. Letters and Recollections of Sir Walter Scott. 1904, 1909. Hunnewell, J. F. The Lands of Scott. Edinburgh, 1871. Husband, M3. F. A. Dictionary of characters in the Waverley Novels. 1910. Hutton, R. H. Sir Walter Scott. (English Men of Letters series.) 1878 and 1896. Irving, Washington. Abbotsford and Newstead Abbey. 1835, 1850. Jack, A. A. Essays on the Novel as illustrated by Scott and Miss Austen. 1897. Jacob, C. G. Walter Scott. Ein biographisch-literarischer Versuch. 1827. Jeafferson, J. C. Novels and Novelists. 2 vols. 1858. [Vol. ii.] Jeffrey, F. Contributions to the Edinburgh Review. 1853.380 Bibliography [CH. Jennings, L. J. Correspondence and Diaries of Croker, J. W. 2nd edn. 3 vols. 1885. Jerrold, B. The Best of all Good Company. 1871. Keble, J. Occasional Papers and Reviews. Oxford, 1877. Lacroix, P. Soirees de Walter Scott a Paris. 1829. Landon, L. E. Life and Literary Remains of. 2 vols. 1841. [Vol. II.] Lang, A. Letters to Dead Authors. 1886. - Life and Letters of J. G. Lockhart. 2 vols. 1896. -Sir Walter Scott. (Literary Lives series.) 1896, 1906. - Scott and the Border Minstrelsy. 1910. Lang, A. and J. Highways and Byways in the Borders. 1913. Lennox, Lord William Pitt. Celebrities I have known. Second Series. 2 vols. 1877. [Vol. II.] Leslie, C. R. Autobiographical Recollections. 2 vols. 1860. Lockhart, C. S. Mi. Centenary Memorials of Sir Walter Scott. 1871. Lockhart, J. G. Memoirs of the Life of Sir Walter Scott, Baronet. 2 vols. Edinburgh 1837-8. 10 vols. Edinburgh, 1839, and later edns. Abridged edn. 1871. Edn de luxe. Edinburgh, 1899. The Ballantyne Humbug handled. Edinburgh, 1839. MacCrie, T. Vindication of the Covenanters in a review of The Tales of My Landlord. Edinburgh, 1845. MacCunn, F. A. Sir Walter Scott's friends. Edinburgh, 1909, and later edns. Mackay, C. Forty Years Recollections. 2 vols. 1871. [Vol. II.] Mackenzie, R. S. Sir Walter Scott, the Story of his Life. 1871. Maigron, L. Le Roman historique a l'6poque romantique. Essai sur linfluence de Walter Scott. Paris, 1898. Cf. The Quarterly Review, vol. cxc, 1899. Martineau, H. Miscellanies. 2 vols. Boston [U.S.], 1836. Mason, E. T. Personal Traits of British Authors. 2 vols. New York. 1855. [Vol. II.] Masson, D. British Novelists and their Styles. Cambridge, 1859. Maxwell-Scott, Hon. Mrs. The Making of Abbotsford. 1897. Millar, J. H. A Literary History of Scotland. 1903. Miller, Hugh. Essays. Edinburgh, 1862. L eading Articles. Edinburgh, 1862. Miinto, W. The Literature of the Georgian Era. Edinburgh, 1894. Encyclopaedia Britannica. Eleventh edn. Scott, by Minto, W. Moir, D. M. Sketches of the Poetical Literature of the last half century. Cambridge, 1851. Morgan, A. E. Scott and his Poetry. 1913. Napier, G.G..Homes and Haunts of Scott. 1907. Neubiirger, E. Goethe und Walter Scott. In Nachkliinge. Frankfort, 1900. Norgate, G. Le Grys. Life of Sir Walter Scott. 1906. Olcott, E. S. The Country of Sir Walter Scott. 1913. Oliphant, M. 0. The Literary History of England in the end of the eighteenth and beginning of the nineteenth century. 3 vols. 1882. [Vol. II.] Omond, T. S. The Romantic Triumph. Edinburgh, 1900. Palgrave, F. T. Landscape in Poetry. 1896. Prescott, W. H. Critical and Historical Essays. 1850. Robberds, J. W. Life of Taylor, W., of Norwich. 2 vols. 1843. Roesel, L. K. Die literarischen und personlichen Beziehungen Sir Walter Scotts zu Goethe. Diss. Leipzig, 1902. Rogers, C. (ed.). The Centenary Garland. Edinburgh, 1871. G enealogical Memoirs of the Family of Scott. 1877.I]

Sir fWalter Scott

381

Rogers, M. The Waverley Dictionary. Chicago, 1879. Rogers, S. Table Talk. 1856. Rossetti, W. M. Lives of Famous Poets. 1878, and later edns. Saintsbury, G. The Historical Novel. Essays in English Literature, 1780 -1860. Second Series. 1895. - A History of Nineteenth Century Literature (1780-1895). 1896. - Sir Walter Scott. (Famous Scots series.) 1897. Sarrazin, G. Les Poetes modernes d'Angleterre. Paris, 1884. Schmidt, J. Walter Scott und seine Bedeutung fur unsere Zeit. Westermanns Monatshefte, xxvI (1869). Scott, Adam. Sir Walter Scott's first love. 1896. Scott, C. G. and A. Letters of Sir Walter Scott's Family to their governess, 1905. Scott, J., of Gala. Journal of a tour to Waterloo and Paris with Sir Walter Scott. 1842. Scott, Sir Walter. Illustrations of the Lay of the Last Minstrel: with anecdotes and descriptions. 1808. - Illustrations of the Novels and Tales of the author of Waverley with biographical notes. 1823. - Soir6es d'Abbotsford, chroniques et nouvelles recueillies dans les salons de Walter Scott. Paris, 1834. - he Waverley Gallery of the principal Female Characters in Sir Walter Scott's romances. 1841. - Particulars and conditions of sale of copyrights, etc. of the Works of Sir Walter Scott. 1851. - Beautes de Walter Scott. Magnifiques portraits des h6roines de Walter Scott, accompagnes chacun d'un portrait litt6raire par MM. A. Dumas, Carmouche, etc. Paris, 1852. Catalogue of the Scott Exhibition, 1871. With Preface by Sir W. Stewart Maxwell. Edinburgh, 1811. Senior, W. N. Essays on Fiction. 1864. Shairp, J. C. Aspects of Poetry, being Lectures delivered at Oxford. Oxford, 1881. Siebert, A. Untersuchungen zu Walter Scott's Waverley. 1903. Skene, J. Sketches of the Existing Localities alluded to in the Waverley Novels. Edinburgh, 1829. - Memories of Sir Walter Scott. Ed. Thomson, B. 1909. Smiles, Samuel. Life of John Murray. 2 vols. 1891. Smith, Goldwin. Sir Walter Scott in English Poets. Ed. Ward, T. W. Vol. iv. 1883. Sproat, G. M. Sir Walter Scott as a Poet. 1871. Stendhal. Walter Scott et la Princesse de Cleves. In Racine et Shakespeare. Paris, 1823. - elanges d'art et de litterature. Paris, 1824. Stephen, Sir Leslie. Hours in a Library. Vol. I. 1874. New edn, with additions. Vol. i. 1907. - The Story of Scott's Ruin. Studies of a Biographer. Vol. II. 1898. - Dictionary of National Biography. Sir Walter Scott. Stevenson, R. L. A Gossip on Romance. Longmans' Magazine. February 1882. Rptd in Memories and Portraits, 1887, and later edns. Ticknor, G. Life, Letters and Journals. 2 vols. 1876. Tuckerman, R. A History of English Prose Fiction. New York, 1882. Vaughan, C. E. The Romantic Revolt. Edinburgh, 1907. Veitch, J. The feeling for Nature in Scottish Poetry. 2 vols. Edinburgh, 1887. [Vol. II.]382 Bibliography [CH. Veitch, J. History and Poetry of the Scottish Border. 2nd edn. 2 vols. Edinburgh, 1893. [Vol. II.] Verrall, A. W. Collected Literary Essays. Cambridge, 1913. Waille, V. Le Romantisme de Manzoni. Algiers, 1890. Walker, H. Three centuries of Scottish Literature. 2 vols. Glasgow, 1893. [Vol. II.] Warner, R. Illustrations, historical, biographical, etc. of the Novels by the author of Waverley. 3 vols. 1823-4. Watt, J. C. Great Novelists. 1885. Watt, L. M. Scottish Life and Poetry. 1912. White, James. Robert Burns and Walter Scott. 1858. Williams, A. M. Scott as a Man of Letters. Engl. Stud. Vol. xxxviI. Leipzig, 1907. Willis, N. P. Famous Persons and Famous Places. 1854. Wright, G. N. Landscape-historical illustrations of Scotland and the Waverley Novels from drawings by J. M. W. Turner. 1836-8. Wyndham, G. Sir Walter Scott. 1908. Yonge, C. D. Three Centuries of English Literature. 1872. - Life of Sir Walter Scott. (Great Writers series.) 1888. [With Bibliography by Anderson, J. P.] Young, C. A. The Waverley Novels. 1907. CHAPTER II BYRON For full list of magazine articles and criticism, contemporary and afterwards, see D. of N. B. (article by Stephen, Sir Leslie), bibliography by Anderson, J. P., attached to Roden Noel's Life and Byroniana und Anderes aus dem Englischen Seminar in Erlangen. For a complete bibliography of Byron's works, including translations, see The Works of Lord Byron, ed. by Coleridge, E. H., vol. vII, pp. 89 ff., 1904. I. MSS IN BRITISH MUSEUM The following MSS comprise letters and other Byron data: Egerton MSS. 2027 (Childe Harold's Pilgrimage. Poems written abroad with autograph corrections and notes); 2028 (British Bards; a satire, 1808. Rough proof-sheets with autograph corrections and instructions for printing); 2029 (Hints from Horace); 3030 (Draft of Byron's speech on the Frame-work bill, 1812, in his own hand. Proof-sheets with autograph corrections); 2075, ff. 29-31; 2332, f. 2 (Stanzas to Jessy, 1807); 2611 (Byron's letters to Hanson, J., his solicitor, 1806-16); 2612, 2613 (Correspondence of Hanson, J., relating to the Byron estates); 2869, if. 7-12. Additional MlSS. 21508, f. 52; 22119 (George Gordon Byron's [natural son of the poet] forged letters and notes to S. Rogers's poems, 1823); 22130, f. 95; 28721, f. 38; 31037 and 31038 (Letters to his sister Augusta, letters and papers relating to his burial, and various poems); 33964, f. 237; 34583, f. 443; 35251, f. 13; 36455, if. 1-583 (MSS of J. C. Hobhouse's Notes and Historical Illustrations of the Fourth Canto of Childe Harold, 1817); 36456, ff. 18, 44, 334, 337, 343, 419, 425b; 36457, ff. 144,152,154 and 357; ff. 437, 438 (ConcerningII]

Byron

383

alterations in Cantos I and II of Don Juan); 36459, ff. 113, 137, 186; and 307 (Letter from the Contessa Guiccioli concerning Byron, 1822); 36460, ff. 158, 160, 169, 174, 219, 300, 325, 355, 361; 36461, ff. 412, 418; and 438,499 (Reputed confessions by Lady Caroline Lamb concerning her intercourse with Byron); 36463, f. 104; 36464, if. 259, 260; 36465, ff. 86, 88; 36466, ff. 18, 263, 278, 284; 36469, ff. 109, 111, 113 (Letters on Byron's proposed burial in Westminster Abbey); 36472, ff. 148,151; 36622 (Diary of Williams, E. E., relating to Byron, 1821-2). II. WORKS Fugitive Pieces.... Newark, 1806. [Privately printed; entire issue destroyed excepting three copies.] Rptd in facsimile, 1886. Poems on Various Occasions. Newark, 1807. [Only 100 copies printed.] Hours of Idleness: A Series of Poems, Original and Translated. By George Gordon, Lord Byron, a Minor.... Newark, 1807. Imitations and Translations from the Ancient and Modern Classics, together with Original Poems never before published. Collected by Hobhouse, J. C., B.A. of Trinity College, Cambridge. 1809. The Poetical Works of Lord Byron. From the last London edition. 2 vols. Boston [U.S.A.], 1813. London, 1814. The Works of the Right Honourable Lord Byron. 2 vols. 1815. [Consisting of separately published works, with collective title prefixed.] 1817. 8 vols. 1815-20. 8 vols. 1815, 1817-20. Poems on his own Domestic Circumstances. i. Fare thee well! ii. A Sketch from Private Life. By Lord Byron. With the Star of the Legion of Honour, and other poems. [Seven poems.] 1816. 2nd edn. 1816. Another edn. Dublin, 1816. 6th edn, containing eight poems. 1816. 8th edn, containing nine poems. 1816. 15th edn, containing nine poems. 1816. The Works of the Right Honourable Lord Byron. 5 vols. 1817. 8 vols. 1818-22. 13 vols. Leipzig, 1818-22. Vols. I-III. 1819. Comprehending all his suppressed poems. Embellished with a portrait and a sketch of his lordship's life.... 2nd edn. 6 vols. Paris, 1819. Also 16 vols. Paris, 1822-4. Three Poems not included in the Works of Byron (Lines to Lady T., The Aenigma, The Curse of Minerva). 1818. Works. (English Bards, Curse of Minerva, The Waltz.) Philadelphia, 1820. Works of Lord Byron. 5 vols. 1821. Vols. v, vi, vii. 1824,1825. The Complete Works of Lord Byron, with a biographical and critical notice by Lake, J. W. 7 vols. Paris, 1825. The Works of Lord Byron, including the suppressed poems. (The Life of Lord Byron [by Lake, J. W. With the facsimile of a letter to the editor of Galignani's Messenger].) Paris, 1826, 1828. Reissued on fine paper with a new title-page. 1827. The Works of Lord Byron. 4 vols. 1826. 6 vols. 1829. Reissued in 4 vols. 1829. 4 vols. 1830. 6 vols. 1831. The Complete Works of Lord Byron, including his Lordship's suppressed poems, with others never before published. (The Life of Lord Byron. [Abridged from the life by Lake, J. W., with a fac-simile of a letter from Lord Byron to the editor of Galignani's Messenger.]) Paris, 1831. The Works of Lord Byron: with his letters and journals, and his life by Thomas Moore. 17 vols. 1832-3. [Vols. I-xII bear In fourteen volumes on title-pages.] Also 17 vols. 1835, 1832, 1833. [Vols. I and XII dated 1835; vols. II-xi, 1832; vols. xIII-xvi, 1833.]384 Bibliography [CH. The Complete Works of Lord Byron, reprinted from the last London edition, with considerable additions, now first published; containing notes and illustrations by Moore, Walter Scott, Campbell, Jeffrey, Egerton Brydges, Wilson, Hobhouse, Dallas, Hunt, Milman, Lockhart, Bowles, Heber, Medwin, Gamba, Croly, Ugo Foscolo, Ellis, Kennedy, Parry, Stanhope, Gait, Nathan, Lady Blessington, Mrs Shelley etc. and a complete index, to which is prefixed a Life, by Henry Lytton Bulwer. Paris, 1835. The Works of Lord Byron. Complete in one volume. With notes by Thomas Moore, Lord Jeffrey, Sir Walter Scott, Bishop Heber, Samuel Rogers etc. 1837. Reissued 1845, 1850 and with portrait and illustrative engravings, 1859. The Poetical Works, Letters and Journals, of Lord Byron: with notices of his life, by Thomas Moore. [This collection was formed by Watts, Wm, and consists of the Poetical Works of Lord Byron, in eight volumes, published by Murray, 1839; and the Letters and Journals of Lord Byron: with notices of his life by Moore, T., in two volumes, published by Murray, 1830; to which have been added Byron's Letter to * * * * ** * * *, on the Rev. W. L. Bowles's Strictures on the life and writings of Pope.... Second edition, and a few other printed papers; also numerous views, portraits, autograph letters and signatures of distinguished persons, etc.] 44 vols. 1844 [1839]. The Works of Lord Byron; in verse and prose. Including his letters, journals, etc. With a sketch of his life. [Ed. Halleck, Fitz Greene.] Hartford [U.S.A.], 1847. The Works of Lord Byron: with a life and illustrative notes, by William Anderson. 2 vols. Edinburgh, [1850]. The Complete Works of Lord Byron.... containing besides the notes and illustrations by Moore, Walter Scott, Campbell, Jeffrey... considerable additions and original notes; to which is prefixed a life by Thomas Moore [abridged].... 2nd edn. Frankfort, 1852. The Illustrated Byron. With upwards of two hundred engravings from original drawings by Kenny Meadows, Birket Foster, H. K. Browne, Gustave Janet and E. Morin. [1854, 1855.] The Poetical Works of Lord Byron. A new edn. 6 vols. 1855, 1856. - New edn, the text carefully revised. 1857. Reissued 1867. With illustrations by Halswelle, Keeley. (The Life of Lord Byron. By Leighton, Alexander.) Edinburgh, 1861. Also [1868]. - 10 vols. Boston [U.S.A.], 1861. Works of Lord Byron.... 2nd edn. 5 vols. 1866. Collection of British Authors. Vols. vII-xI. 1841, etc. The Poetical Works of Lord Byron. With illustrations by Gilbert, F. [1869.] - ith illustrative notes by Moore, Jeffrey, Scott, etc. New York, 1869. Ed. with a critical memoir,iby Rossetti, W. M. Illustrated by Brown, Ford Maddox. 1870. Reissued, [1872]. The Complete Poetical Works of Lord Byron. With an introductory memoir by Scott, William B. With illustrations. [1874.] Also 1883, reissued 1887; and 3 vols., 1886 [1885]. Poetry of Byron, chosen and arranged by Arnold, M. 1881. The Poetical Works of Lord Byron. Edited with a critical memoir, by Rossetti, W. M. Illustrated by Seccombe, T. [1882.] - With original and additional notes. 12 vols. 1885 [1886]. Reissued on larger paper [1891, 1892]. Works, ed. by Henley, W. E. Yol. I (Letters, 1804-13) (no more published). 1897.II] Byron 385 The Works of Lord Byron. A new revised and enlarged edn with illustrations. Poetry... (vol. vii. Bibliography.-Index.) Ed. by Coleridge, E. H. 7 vols. (Letters and Journals.... Ed. by Prothero, R. E. 6 vols.) 13 vols. 1898-1904. The Poetical Works. Edited, with a memoir, by Coleridge, E. H. 1905. The Poems and Plays of Lord Byron. (With an introduction by Trent, W. P.) (Everyman's Library.) [1910, etc.] In progress. III. TRANSLATIONS. GENERAL (Euvres completes de Lord Byron, traduites de l'anglais par MMI. A. P. [i.e. Amedee Pichot] et E. D. S. [i.e. Eusebe de Salle]; troisieme edition, entierement revue et corrigee. 15 vols. Paris, 1821-4. 11th edn. 1842. - avec notes et commentaires, comprenant ses m6moires publies par T. Moore... Traduction nouvelle [in prose] par 3M. Paulin. 13 vols. Paris, 1830, 1831. traduction nouvelle.... par B. Laroche.... Avec les notes et commentaires de Sir Walter Scott, Thomas Moore.... precedees de l'histoire de la vie et des ouvrages de Lord Byron, par John Galt. 4 vols. Paris, 1836, 1837. (Euvres.... Traduites en vers francais par Orby Hunter et Pascal Rame. Vols I-III. [No more published.] Paris, 1845. -Traduction nouvelle [in prose], pr6ecdee d'un essai sur Lord Byron par Daniel Lesueur [i.e. Jeanne Loiseau]. Vols. I, I. Paris, 1891,1892. Lord Byron's sammtliche Werke. 12 Thle. Frankfort, 1830,1831. Von A. Bbttger. Leipzig, 1840. 8th edn. 8 vols. Leipzig, 1901. Nach den Anforderungen unserer Zeit neu iibersetzt von mehreren. Zweite unveranderte Ausgabe. 10 vols. Pforzheim, 1842. - on 0. Gildemeister. 6 vols. Berlin, 1864. 4th edn. 1888. Frei iibersetzt von A. Seubert. 3 vols. Leipzig, [1874]. Opere complete di Lord Byron, voltate dall' originale inglese in prosa italiana da C. Rusconi, con note ed illustrazioni del volgarizzatore, nonche dei signori Moore, Walter Scott, Campbell.... ec., ec., a cui si aggiungono i dialoghi di Lord Byron compilati da 3I. Medwin, un saggio sul di lui genio-una prefazione-e un' appendice, parte desunti da altri scritti, parte tradotti, parte originali. 2 vols. Padua, 1842. Opere di Lord Giorgio Byron, precedute da un saggio intorno al genio e al carattere del medesimo. Naples, 1886. Another edn. Naples, 1891. CouIneHenia JIopa a Ba1ipHa BL nepeBoAax% PyccIixT IIO03TOBs, HI3aHHuIx% noAT pexar;uieio H. B. Fep6em.a. 5 vols. Petrograd, 1864-6. 2nd edn. 1874-7. 3rd edn. 1883-4. Poezye Lorda Byrona w przekladzce polskich poet6w. Warsaw, 1885 ff. Td "A-cLvTa rov Bvpovos. 3 vols. Athens, 1895. IV. COLLECTIONS OF DRAMAS Dramas. By Lord Byron. In Two Volumes [vol. I. Manfred, Marino Faliero, Heaven and Earth, Sardanapalus; vol. II. The Two Foscari, Cain, The Deformed Transformed, Werner]. 1837. Also 1853. Marino Faliero e I Due Foscari. Tragedie di Lord G. Byron. Versione dall' original inglese del P. G. B. Cereseto delle scuole pie. Savona, 1845. Tragedie di Giorgio Lord Byron. Traduzione del Cav. Andrea laffei. Sardanapalo. Marino Faliero. I Due Foscari. Florence, 1862. Lord Byrons Dramatische Werke. Deutsch von W. Griizmacher. Manfred. Kain. Himmel und Erde. Sardanapal. (Nos. 112, 113 of the Bibliothek auslandischer Klassiker.) Hildburghausen, 1870.

E. L. XII.

25386 Bibliography [CH. Poemas dramaticos de Lord Byron. Cain. Sardanapalo. Manfredo. Traducidos en verso castellano. Madrid, 1886. Udvalgte dramatiske Digte og Fortaellinger af Byron. Oversatte af E. Leibcke. Copenhagen, 1873-6. V. CORRESPONDENCE AND JOURNALS Correspondence of Lord Byron, with a friend, including his letters to his mother, written from Portugal, Spain, Greece, and the shores of the Mediterranean, 1809, 1810, and 1811. Also recollections of the Poet, by the late R. C. Dallas,.... and a continuation and preliminary statement of the proceedings by which the letters were suppressed in England, at the suit of Lord Byron's executors. By Dallas, A. R. C. 3 vols. Paris, 1825. Letters and Journals of Lord Byron: with notices of his life, by Thomas Moore. 2 vols. 1830. Also Paris, 1831. A new edn complete in one volume. 1847. New and complete edn with portraits and illustrations. 1860. New and revised edn with twelve illustrations. 1875 [1874]. Memoires de Lord Byron, publiees par Thomas Moore; traduites de l'anglais par Louise S. Belloc. 5 vols. Paris, 1830. Eine Autobiographie nach Tagebuichern und Briefen. Mit Einleitung und Erlauterungen von E. Engel. Erganzungsband zu Byrons Werken. Zweite Auflage. Berlin, 1876. Moore, T. Prose and Verse; with suppressed passages from the Memoirs of Byron. 1878. Letters. Selected and edited with introduction by Blind, M. 1886, 1905. Letters and Journals. 6 vols. Edited Prothero, R. E. See 1898-1904 edn of Works. Lettres, trad. par J. Delachaume, avec une preface de G. Clemenceau. 1911. VI. SEPARATE WORKS Address spoken at the opening of Drury Lane Theatre. 1812. The Age of Bronze; or, Carmen Seculare et Annus haud Mirabilis. 1823. 3rd edn. 1823. Beppo, a Venetian story....1818. [Several other edns same year.] Beppo, eene Venetiaansche vertelling. Naar het Engelsch van Lord Byron. Amsterdam, 1834. Beppo.... Traduit en vers francais, avec texte anglais en regard. Paris, 1865. Beppo. Dommedagssynet.... Oversatte af Alfred Ipsen. Copenhagen, 1891. The Bride of Abydos. A Turkish Tale. 1813. 2nd, 3rd, 4th, and 5th edns, 1813. 6th, 7th, 8th, 9th and 10th, 1814; 11th, 1815. Another edn, 1825, also [1844]. De Abydeensche Verloofde. Uit het Engelsch.... door J. van Lennep. Amsterdam, 1826. Narzeczona z Abydos. Powiese Turecka. 1838. Lorda Byrona Nevesta z Abydu: povest Turecka. Z Anglickeho prelozil J. V. Fric. Prague, 1854. Die Braut von Abydos. Der Traum. Zwei Gedichte.... Im Versmass des Originals iibertragen von 0. Riedel. Hamburg, 1872. Cain; a mystery. 1821. [With Sardanapalus and The Two Foscari.] Cf. Schaffner, A., Lord Byrons Cain und seine Quellen. 1880. - By the author of Don Juan. 1822.h

II] Byron 387 Cain; a mystery. By Lord Byron. To which is added a Letter from the author to Mr Murray, the original publisher. 1822. Cain, mystere dramatique en trois actes. Paris, 1823. Kain. Ein Mysterium. Mazeppa.... Aus dem Englischen iibersetzt von Friederike Friedmann. Leipzig, 1855. Kain: poemat dramatyczny.... w trzech aktach, przetozyi A. Pajgert. Lw6w, 1868. Kain: dramaticka baseni.... Prelozil J. Durdik. Poesie Svetova, etc. Pt 1. 1871. Cain. Misterie-spel.... Metrische vertaling met inleiding en aanteekeningen door S. A. Kok. The Hague, 1906. Childe Harold's Pilgrimage [Cantos I and II]. A romaunt. [With fourteen other poems] 1812. 2nd edn [with twenty other poems], 1812. 3rd edn [and other poems], 1812. 4th and 5th edns, 1812. 6th edn, 1813. 8th edn, 1814. 10th edn, 1815. 11th edn, 1819. Canto the third. 1816. Canto the fourth [with other poems]. 1818. A romaunt in four cantos. 2 vols. 1819. Also 1825,1826,1827, [1830?], New York, [1831], 1837, with illustrations, 1841. With memoir by Spalding, W. [1866.] Ed. Hiley, W. 1877. Ed. Tozer, H. F. 1885, 1907 (Oxford). Ed. Keene, H. G. 1893. Ed. Gollancz, I. 1898. (The Temple Classics.) Ed. Morris, E. E. 2vols. 1899. Ed. Thompson, A. Hamilton. Cambridge, 1913. Cf. Hobhouse, J. C., Historical Illustrations of the fourth Canto of Childe Harold, 1818; Kolbing, E., Zur Textiiberlieferung von Byrons 'Childe Harold,' Cantos i-I, 1896; Maier, H., Entstehungsgeschichte von Byrons 'Childe Harold's Pilgrimage,' I-Ii, 1911; Moll, O. E. E., Der Stil von Byron's Childe Harold's Pilgrimage. (Normannia. Vol. x.) Berlin, 1911. Childe Harolds Pilgrimsfiird.... Ofversatt af A. F. Skjoldebrand. Stockholm, 1832. Ritter Harold's Pilgerfahrt.... Im Versmass des Originals iibersetzt J. C. von Zedlitz. Stuttgart and Tiibingen, 1836. Childe Harold. Byron utan anya nyelv6bol magyarra forditotta Bickersteth Johanka. Genfben, 1857. Poezye Lorda Byrona w tlumnaczeniu Polski6m. Wydane staraniem B. M. Wolffa. Vol. I. Wedrowki Czajlda-Harolda. Petrograd, 1857. Le Pelerinage de Childe Harold. Traduction en vers frangais par E. Quiertant. Paris, 1861. Le Pelerinage de Childe Harold. Version en vers avec notes explicatives par Gabriel Leprevost. Paris, 1910. A Peregrinacao de Childe Harold. [Translated into Portuguese by Guimaraes, F. J. Pinheiro.] Traduceoes poeticas. 1863. I1 Pellegrinaggio d' Aroldo. Poema.... tradotto da C. Faccioli. Florence, 1873. Junker Harolds Pilgrimsfart.... Oversat af Adolf Hansen. Copenhagen, 1880. Childe-Haroldova Pout. Prelozila Eliska Krasnohorska. Prague, 1890. The Corsair, a tale, 1814. 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th, 6th and 7th edns, 1814. 9th, 1815. 10th, 1818. Another edn, 1825. Il Corsaro, novella di Lord Byron. Turin, 1819. Other edns: Milan, 1820; Bologna, 1870; Pavia, 1879. El Corsario. Valencia, 1832. Korsarz. Powiesc. 1841. Tl6maczenia. Vol. III. 25-2388 Bibliography [H. Corsaren. (Ofversattning af Talis Qualis [pseud., i.e. Carl Wilhelm August Strandberg. In verse.]) Stockholm, 1868. Korsar. Lara. Basnicke povidky.... prelozil Cenek Ibl. 1885. Poesie svetova, etc. Pt 23. A Kal6z.... Forditotta Kacziany Geza. No. 311 of the Olcs6 Konyvtar. Budapest, 1892. Uhde, H. Zur Poetik von Byrons Corsair. Bergedorf, 1907. The Curse of Minerva... Printed by Davison, T. 1812. [This first edition is very rare.] The Curse of Minerva. A poem. Philadelphia, 1815. 3rd edn, Paris, 1818. 4th edn, Paris, 1820. The Deformed Transformed; a drama. 1824. 2nd and 3rd edns, 1824. Cf. Varnhagen, H., Uber Byrons dramatisches Bruchstiick Der umgestaltete Missgestaltete. 1905. Lord Byron' Elvaltoztatott idomtalanjab6l tored6k. Lukacs Mriczt61l. Budapesti Arvizkoniv, etc. Kot. 4. 1840, etc. Don Juan. [Cantos i and i.] 1819. A new edn, 1819. Another edn, 1819. A new edn, 1820; another edn, 1820; a new edn, 1822. Cantos III, IV and v. 1821. 5th edn revised and corrected, 1821. [Cantos i-v]....with a preface by a Clergyman. 1822. Cantos vi, vII and vIIi. 1823. Cantos vi, vII, vii (ix-xi). 1823. Cantos Ix, x and xI. 1823. Cantos xII, xIII and xiv. 1823. Cantos xv and xvi. 1824. A poem. [Sixteen cantos.] 5 pts. 1822 [-4]. A new, revised and enlarged edition with illustrations. Ed. by Coleridge, Ernest Hartley. 1906. Don Juan.... Forsta Sangen. Med upplysande och utwalde noter. Ofversatt ifran engelska originalet. Stockholm, 1838. Byron's Don Juan iibersetzt von O. Gildemeister. 2 vols. Bremen, 1845. Also translated byA. Bottger, Leipzig, 1849; and W. Schaffer, 1867. AouE; Xyanin, ito3a...uepeBOjb H. Xau;npa. Petrograd, 1846. Don Juan.... Tradusa de I. Eliade. [A translation in prose of cantos I, ii.] Bukarest, 1847. Don Zuan.... Piesn pierwsza, prezefozona przez W. z Baworowa. Canto i. Tarnopol. 1863. Don Juan de Lord Byron. Traduction nouvelle, prec6dee d'une preface de M. Legouv6. Paris, [1869]. Il Don Juan.... Recato in altrettante stanze italiane dal Cavaliere E. Casali. Milan, 1876. Don Juan, poema.... Traduccion [into Spanish prose] de F. Villabra. 2 vols. Madrid, 1876. Also by J. A. R. Barcelona, 1883. Don Juan. Oversat paa Dansk af H. Drachmann. Med. Indledningsog Slutningsdigte af Overseetteren. 2 vols. Copenhagen, 1880 -1902. The Dream. Byron's Dream, illustrated. [1849.] German transl., see under The Bride of Abydos. English Bards and Scotch Reviewers. [In the Egerton collection of MSS in the B. A. (2028) are the proof sheets of this satire, corrected by Byron, in which the title is given as The British Bards; a Satire, and dated 1808. 2029 contains proof sheets of Hints from Horace, being a partial imitation of the Epistle Ad Pisones, and intended as a sequel to English Bards and Scotch Reviewers.]II]

Byron

389

English Bards and Scotch Reviewers. A satire. [1809.] 2nd edn, 1809. 3rd edn [of which there are various issues], 1810. 4th edn [several issues] 1810 and 1811. 4th [or rather the 5th suppressed edn], 1811. Another edn, New York, 1817. Paris, 1818. Deutsche Dramatiker und Hamburger Kritiker. Eine Satyre, Byron's English bards and Scotch reviewers frei und zeitgemiss nachgebildet vom Verfasser des Mohammed [G. F. Daumer]. Berlin, 1857. Fare Thee Well. [1816.] - a poem. A Sketch from Private Life, a poem. Bristol, 1816. The Giaour, a fragment of a Turkish tale. 1813. New edn, with some additions, 1813. 3nd edn, with considerable additions, 1813. 5th edn, 1813. 6th edn, 1813. 7th edn, 1813. 9th, 10th, 11th and 12th edns, 1814. 14th edn, 1815. Der Gauer, metrisch bearbeitet. Berlin, 1819. Poezye Lorda Byrona tiumaczone, Giaur przez A. Mickiewicza, Korsarz przez E. Odynica. Paris, 1835. rjfpi BaiipoHa HIepeBe:jr E. Miime;b. [In prose.] Petrograd, 1862. IIoLnilaTa Bppowvos. 'O IrKLaoVp.... METdbpa'CLs AiKKacrEpCp(v K. AocrCov. 'EKCS8ETaTL rO 8ETEpOV Trro 'Ap. K. AoorLov. Athens, 1873. Heaven and Earth, a mystery. 1824. Another edn, [1825?]. [First printed in The Liberal, No. ii, vol. I, 1822.] Mayn, G. IUber Lord Byrons Heaven and Earth. Breslau, 1887. Hebrew Melodies. (On the Death of Sir Peter Parker, Bart.) 1815. Also 1823 and 1825. Cf. Beutler, C. A., Uber Lord Byrons 'Hebrew Melodies.' 1912. Hebriische Gesange. Aus dem Englischen des Lord Byron von F. Theremin. Mit beigedrucktem englischen Text. Berlin, 1820. Melodie ebraiche di Lord G. Byron. Versione di P. P. Parzanese. Naples, 1837. Hebreiska Melodier.... Ofversatta af T. Lind. Helsingfors, 1862. Jpdiske sange. Oversatte af J. Andresen-Halmrast. Christiania, 1889. piW n' W....Hebrew Melodies.... Translated by S. Mandelkern. Leipzig, 1890. Hours of Idleness. See Early Collections. The Island, or Christian and his comrades. 1823. Lotz, C. Quellenstudie fiber Lord Byron's The Island. Leipzig Diss. 1902. The Lament of Tasso. 1817. 2nd, 3rd, 4th and 5th edns, 1817. 6th edn, 1818. Lamento del Tasso.... Recato in Italiano da M. Leoni. Pisa, 1818. Also by G. Polidori, 1843, and G. Godio, 1873. Los Lamentaciones del Tasso. Version [in prose] de J. A. R. 1883. Lara, a tale. Jacqueline, a tale. 1814. Il Lara di Lord Byron. Tradotto dal Signor Girolami Ce Bazoldo.... con giunta di tre altre traduzioni dall' inglese, una dal tedesco, e tre canzoni dell' autore. Paris, 1828. Jlapa...Cp6cKH oa A. oIIooBHua. 1860. Lara. (Ofversittning af Talis Qualis [pseud., i.e. Carl Wilhelm August Strandberg].) Stockholm, 1869. Lara... Pielozil Cenek Ibl. See ante, The Corsair (Korsfr).390

Bibliography

[cH.

Manfred, a dramatic poem. 1817. Second edn. 1817. Also 1824. Cf. Lohmann, Byrons Manfred. und sein Verhailtnis zu Dichtungen verwandten Inhalts. Anglia, v, pp. 291 ff. 1882; Varnhagen, Hermann, De rebus quibusdam compositionem Byronis Dramatis quod Manfred inscribitur praecedentibus, etc. Erlangen, 1909. Manfred... Oversat af P. F. Wulff. Copenhagen, 1820. Byron's Manfred. Einleitung, Ubersetzung und Anmerkungen. Ein Beitrag zur Kritik der gegenwartigen deutschen dramatischen Kunst und Poesie, von Posgaru [i.e. Suckow, G. F. W.]. Breslau, 1839. Also German translations by H. von Kosen, Leipzig, 1858; L. Freytag, Berlin, 1872; W. Starke, Munich, 1912. Manfred, poeme dramatique... traduit par Madame la Comtesse de Lalaing. [In prose]... Seconde edition. Brussels, 1852. Manfred. Een dramatisch gedicht naar Lord Byron, door J. R. Steinmetz. Amsterdam, 1857. Also by W. Gosler, 1882. Manfredo, poema drammatico... versione in prosa. [By Pellico, Silvio.] 1859. Manfred... Przekiad wolny na wiersz polski przez M. Chodzke. Paris, [1859]. Manfredo, poema dramatico, trad. por D. J. Alcala Galiano y Fernandez de las Pefias. Madrid, 1861. 'O MdappE8 * SpaLarrLKov... METdapaC-Ls E. rKpijv. Patras, 1864. Manfred... Forditotta Abranyi Emil. Budapest, 1891. Manfred. Dramska pjesan u tri razdjela... U mjerilu izvornika preveo Stjepan Meldtic. Zagreb, 1894. Manfred. Poema dramatica in trei acte (by T. M. Stoenescu). 1896. Manfred. Basen dramaticka. Prelozil Jaroslav Vrchlicky. (Rediguje Jaroslav Kvapil.) Prague, 1901. Marino Faliero, Doge of Venice. An historical tragedy, in five acts. With notes. The Prophecy of Dante, a poem. 1821. Also 1823 and 1824. Marino Faliero, e I Due Foscari, tragedie... Versione dall' originale inglese del P. G. B. Cereseto. Savona, 1845. Marino Faliero, Doge von Venedig... Freie Ubersetzung von Thierry Preyer. Frankfort, 1883. Also transl. by A. Fitger. Oldenbourg, 1886. Mazeppa, a poem. (Ode [to Venice]-A Fragment [in prose].) 1819. Paris, 1819. Also 1824. Mazeppa, or the Wild Horse of the Ukraine, etc. [1854?]. Mazeppa. Powiesc. 1843. Tt6maczenia. Vol. v. Mazeppa. Traduzione... di T. Virzi. Palermo, 1876. Mazeppa, nach Lord Byron, von F. Freiligrath. In, Nachgelassenes. Stuttgart, 1883. Mazeppa. Prelozil Antonin Klastersky. Prague [1895?]. Sbornik Svetov6 Poesie... Cislo 76. Englander, D. Lord Byrons Mazeppa. Eine Studie. Berlin, 1897. Monody on the Death of the Right Honourable R. B. Sheridan, written at the request of a friend to be spoken at Drury Lane Theatre. 1816. Also 1817 and 1818. [Ode to the Framers of the Frame Bill.] A Political Ode by Lord Byron, hitherto unknown as his production. [Ed. Pearson, J.] 1880. [Only 100 copies printed.] Ode to Napoleon Buonaparte. 1814. Also 1816 and 1818.II]

Byron

391

Parisina. A poem. 1816. See post: The Siege of Corinth. Parisina. Poema... Traduzione italiana in versi. Milan, 1821. Parisina, poeme de Lord Byron... et fragment de Nicolas de Ferrare... Avec commentaires et notices. Paris, 1900. The Prisoner of Chillon, and other poems. 1816. Another edn. Lausanne, 1818. Der Gefangene von Chillon. Dichtung... In dentscher Ubersetzung mit historischer Einleitung von M. von der Marwitz. Vevey and Lausanne, [1865?]. Also by J. G. Hagmann. Leipzig, 1892. The Prisoner of Chillon, and other Poems. Mit Einleitung und Anmerkungen herawisg. von E. Kolbing. Weimar, 1896. Bandinginn i Chillon og Draumurinn... Steingrimur Thorsteinson islenzka5i. (Agrip af aefi Byron's og athugasemdir.) Kaupmannahofn, 1866. The Prophecy of Dante. 1821. See ante, Marino Faliero. Another edn. 1825. La Profecia del Dante. Poema... Traducido del Frances por A. I. Viscayno, etc. [In prose.] Mexico, 1850. La Profezia di Dante. Poema in quattro canti... Tradotto in terzine italiane da Edoardo Roncaldier. Rome, Milan, [1904]. Sardanapalus, a tragedy. The Two Foscari, a tragedy. Cain, a mystery. 1821. Also, Sardanapalus, 1829. Sardanapale, tragedie imitee de Lord Byron par L. Alvin. Brussels, 1834. CapaanaTaJI. IIepeBoB E. 3apima. Petrograd, 1860. Sardanapalo. Tragedia...adaptada a scena [by Guimaraes, F. J. Pinheiro]. Traduceoes poeticas. 1863. Sardanapalus: sorgespel i fenm akter... Firsvenskadt och for scenen behandladt af N. Arfvidsson. Stockholm, 1864. 2capavvdracos, TpayoVSi8a Tro AopSov Bvpoovos [with other poems], uiro X. A. IIappeviSov. Athens, 1865. Sardanapal... Przeklad F. Krauze'go. Warsaw, 1872. Sardanapalo. Tragedia in 5 atti. [In prose.] Milan, 1884. The Siege of Corinth. A poem. Parisina. A poem. 1816. Also 1824. El Sitio de Corinto. Traducido del Frances al Castellano. [In prose.] Paris, 1828. Het Beleg van Corinthe, uit het Engelsch van Lord Byron. Door J. van Lennep. Amsterdam, 1831. The Two Foscari, a tragedy. 1821. See ante, Sardanapalus. Les Deux Foscari, tragedie historique. Beppo, poeme humoristique. Traduction en vers par A. Morisseau. Paris, 1881. Verses to a Beautiful Quaker. 1806. [Privately ptd.] The Vision of Judgment. Paris, 1823. [First ptd in The Liberal, No. 1, vol. I. 1822.] Waltz... By Horace Hornem, Esq. Paris, 1821. --: an apostrophic hymn. By Horace Hornem, Esq. (the author of Don Juan). [With other verses, to which Byron's name is attached.] 1821. Werner, a tragedy. 1823. Paris, 1823. New York, 1848. Cf. Stoehsel, C., Lord Byrons Traunerspiel Werner und seine Quelle. (Erlanger Beitrage zur englischen Philologie, vol. xi.) 1891. Bepuep....uep. HeIs3BCTuaro. Petrograd, 1829.392 Bibliography [CH. VII. CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE LIBERAL Besides Heaven and Earth and The Vision of Judgment previously mentioned, the following first appeared in The Liberal: Letter to the Editor of My Grandmother's Review. No. 1, vol. I. 1822. Epigrams on Lord Castlereagh. No. 1, vol. I. 1822. The Blues, A Literary Eclogue. No. 3, vol. II. 1823. Morgante Maggiore di Messer Luigi Pulci. No. 4, vol. II. 1823. VIII. AUTHORITIES, BIOGRAPHY AND CRITICISM Ackermann, Richard. Lord Byron. Sein Leben, seine Werke, sein Einfluss auf die deutsche Litteratur. Heidelberg, 1901. - Lord Byron's Verlobung, Ehe und Scheidung. Englisehe Studien. Vol. xxxI, pp. 185-200. 1903. Allais, G. Le pessimisme romantique (Byron et Musset). Revue des Cours et Conf6rences. x. 1897. Alien, Leslie Holdsworth. Die Personlichkeit Percy Bysshe Shelleys. Diss. Leipzig. 1907. Althaus, Friedrich. Der wahre Lord Byron. Nord und Siid. Vol. xxvII, pp. 312-26. 1881. Arbaud, Leon. Lord et Lady Byron. Jne calomnie retrospective. Le Correspondant. Nouvelle serie, vol. XLV, pp. 174-89. Paris, 1870. Arnold, Matthew. Byron. Essays in Criticism. Second Series. 1888. Austin, Alfred. A Vindication of Lord Byron. 1869. - Byron and Wordsworth. The Bridling of Pegasus. 1910. Axon, Wt. A. E. Byron's Influence on European Literature. (In Stray Chapters on Literature, Folk-lore and Archaeology. 1888.) Belloc, Louisa S. Lord Byron. 1824. Beyle, Henri (De Stendhal). Lord Byron en Italie. (Appended to Racine et Shakespeare.) Paris, 1854. Blaquiere, E. Narrative of a second visit to Greece. The last days of Lord Byron, etc. 1825. Blaze de Bury, H. Lord Byron et le Byronisme. Revue des Deux Mondes. 1 Oct. 1872. Bleibtreu, Karl. Byron. Geschichte der englischen Litteratur im 19. Jahrhundert, pp. 151-321. Leipzig, [1888]. Byron der Ubermensch, sein Leben und sein Dichten. Jena, [1897]. - Das Byron-Geheimnis. Munich and Leipzig, 1912. Blessington, Lady. Conversations with Lord Byron. 1834. Bliimel, Magnus. Die Unterhaltungen Lord Byron's mit der Grifin Blessington als ein Beitrag zur Byronbiographie kritisch untersucht. (Breslau Diss.) Breslau, 1900. Bohme, Traugott. Spensers literarisches Nachleben bis zu Shelley. Palaestra. Vol. XCIII. Byron, pp. 259-62. Berlin, 1911. Bowles, W. L. Letters to Byron on a question of poetic criticism. 3rd edn. 1818. Brandes, G. Main Currents in Nineteenth Century Literature. Vol. Iv. 1905. Brandl, Alois. Goethes Verhiltnis zu Byron. Goethe-Jahrbuch. Vol. xx, pp. 1-37. Frankfort, 1899. Goethe und Byron. Osterreichische Rundschau, I, 1883. - Leopold. Die Broughton-Papers und ihr Verhaltnis zur Byron-Frage. Englische Studien. Vol. XLI, pp. 267-88. 1909.II] Byron 393 Brecknock, A. The Pilgrim Poet, Lord Byron of Newstead, etc. 1911. Brougham, Lord. On Byron's Poems. Edinburgh Review, 1820. (Occasioned by English Bards, etc.) Broughton, Lord (John Cam Hobhouse). Recollections of a long life. Ed. Lady Dorchester. Vol. n, pp. 191-355. The Byron Separation. 6 vols. 1909-11. Brydges, Sir Samuel E. Letters on the Character and Poetical Genius of Lord Byron. 1824. - An Impartial Portrait of Lord Byron as a Poet and a Man. 1825. 1854. Byron, Lord, and his Detractors. Roxburghe club. 1906. [In answer to Millbanke's Astarte. 1905.] Byron painted by his Compeers; or, all about Lord Byron, from his marriage to his death, as given in the various newspapers of his day, shewing wherein the American novelist [Stowe, H. B.] gives a truthful account, and wherein she draws on her own morbid imagination. [With two original poems of Lady Byron.] 1869. [See Stowe, Harriet Beecher.] Life, The, Writings, Opinions and Times of the Right Hon. George Gordon Noel Byron, Lord Byron... By an English gentleman, in the Greek military service, and comrade of His Lordship. Compiled from the authentic documents and from long personal acquaintance. 3 vols. 1825. Opinions of Lord Byron on Man, Manners, and Things: with the Parish Clerk's Album, kept at his burial place, Hucknall Torkard. [Ed. L., J. M.] 1834. Byroniana und Anderes aus dem englischen Seminar in Erlangen. (Zur Begriissung der vni. Hauptversammlung des Bayerischen Neuphilologen-Verbandes. Erlangen, 11. bis 13. April 1912.) Erlangen, 1912. [Contains an excellent bibliography of Byron's works, together with biographies and criticism, English and foreign.] Calcafio, J. Tres Poetas pesimistas del siglo xix (Lord Byron, Shelley, Leopardi). Estudio critico. 1907. Cantu, C. Lord Byron and his Works. A biography and essay. [1883.] Castelar, E. Vida de Lord Byron. Havana, 1873. Trans. Arnold, A. 1875. Chasles, V. E. P. Vie et influence de Byron sur son epoque. Etudes sur la Litt6rature et les Mceurs de l'Angleterre au xIxe siecle. Paris, [1850]. Chesterton, G. K. The Optimism of Byron. Twelve types. 1902. Chew, S. C., Junr. The Dramas of Lord Byron. Hesperia, Erganzungsreihe. Gottingen, 1914. Chiarini, G. Lord Byron nella politica e nella letteratura della prima meta del secolo. Nuova Antologia. Vol. xxxiv. (1891.) Churchman, P. H. Byron and Espronceda, etc. 1909. Lord Byron's Experiences in the Spanish Peninsula in 1809, etc. [1909.] The Beginnings of Byronism in Spain. Revue hispanique. Vol. xxIII. (1910.) Clark, W. J. Byron und die romantische Poesie in Frankreich. Diss. Leipzig, 1901. Clinton, G. Memoirs of the Life and Writings of Lord Byron. 1825, 1827. Collins, J. C. The Works of Lord Byron. In Studies in Poetry and Criticism. Pp. 78 ff. 1905. Colton, C. C. Remarks, critical and moral, on the talents of Byron. 1819. Courthope, W. J. The Liberal Movement in English Literature. 1886. Dallas, A. R. C. (ed.). Recollections of the Life of Lord Byron, from the year 1808 to the end of 1814. 1824.394 Bibliograp/y [CH. Dallois, J. ltudes morales et litt6raires a propos de Lord Byron. 1890. Dobelli, A. Dante e Byron. Giornale Dante. 1898. Dowden, Edward. Life of Shelley. 2 vols. 1886. - Byron. Atalanta. Pp. 577-81. June 1890. Duff, J. Wight. Byron and Aberdeen. Aberdeen, 1902. --- Byron. The Bookman. Pp. 9-14. October 1905. Diihring, E. Byron, seine Gesellschaftskritik und Stellung fiber den Dichtern. Leipzig, 1910. Eberty, F. Lord Byron. Eine Biographie. Leipzig, 1862. Eckermann, J. P. Gespriche mit Goethe in den letzten Jahren seines Lebens. Leipzig, 1837, 1848, 1884, etc. Edgcumbe, Richard. Byron; The Last Phase. New York, 1909. Eichler, A. John Hookham Frere: sein Leben und seine Werke; sein Einfluss auf Lord Byron. (Wiener Beitrage zur englischen Philologie, vol. xx.) Vienna, 1905. Eimer, Manfred. Lord Byron und die Kunst. Strassburg, 1907.  Die personlichen Beziehungen zwischen Byron und den Shelleys. (Anglistische Forschungen, Hft xxxII.) Heidelberg, 1910. - Byron und der Kosmos. Ein Beitrag zur Weltanschauung des Dichters und den Ansichten seiner Zeit. (Anglistische Forschungen, Hft. xxxiv.) 1912. -- Byrons Pantheismus vom Jahre 1816. Englische Studien. Vol. XLIII, pp. 396-425. 1911. -- euere deutsche Byron- und Shelleyliteratur. Englische Studien. Vol. XLIV, pp. 130-42. 1911. Vol. xLIv, pp. 423-28. 1912. - Byron's Beziehungen zur deutschen Kultur. Anglia. Vol. xxxvi, pp. 313-59, 397-449. 1912. Elton, Oliver. A Survey of English Literature, 1780-1830. 1912. Elze, Karl. Lord Byron. Berlin, 1870. 2nd edn. 1881. 3rd edn. 1886. Trans. 1872. Engel, Eduard. Lord Byron. Eine Autobiographie nach Tagebiichern und Briefen. Berlin, 1876. -- H. Byron's Stellung zu Shakspere. Ostern, 1903. Esteve, E. Byron et le romantisme frangais. Essai sur la fortune et l'influence de l'oeuvre de Byron en France de 1812 a 1850. Paris, 1907. Cf. Muoni, G.,'La leggenda del Byron in Francia, in Poesia inotturna preromantica, etc., 1908. Farrer, J. A. Literary Forgeries. (Pp. 175-90. The forged letters,of Byron and Shelley.) 1907. Flaischlen, C. Lord Byron in Deutschland. In Centralblatt fur Bibliothekswesen, vol. vii, pp. 455 ff. Leipzig, 1890. Fortoul, H. De lArt actuel. Byron, Scott et le romantisme. Revue encyclop6dique. Vol. LIX. (1833.) Fuess, C. M. Lord Byron as a Satirist in Verse. (Columbia Univ. Studies in English and Comparative Literature.) New York, 1912. Fuhrmann, L. Die Belesenheit des jungen Byron. Berlin, 1903. Galt, John. The Life of Lord Byron. 1830,1908. Gamba, P. A Narrative of Lord Byron's Last Journey to Greece. 1825. Gerard, W. Byron re-studied in his Dramas. 1886. Gillardon, H. Shelleys Einwirkung auf Byron. Karlsruhe, 1898. Goedeke, K. Grundriss zur Geschichte der deutschen Dichtung. 3rd edn. Dresden, 1910. See Iv, 2, pp. 488 ff., for detailed bibliography of the relations of Byron and Goethe. Gordon, Sir Cosmo. The Life and Genius of Lord Byron. 1824. I

7r

IIj btyron 395 Gottschall, Rudolf von. Portrats und Studien. (Byron und die Gegenwart, vol. i, pp. 1-57.) 4 vols. Leipzig, 1870. - Byron. (Der neue Plutarch, vol. iv.) Leipzig, 1878. - ord Byron und die Gegenwart. Unsere Zeit. 1866. Graham, W. Last Links with Byron, Shelley and Keats. 1898. Greef, A. Byron's Lucifer. Englische Studien. Vol. xxxvI, pp. 64-74. 1905. Gribble, F. H. The Love Affairs of Lord Byron. 1910. Groag, J. G. Lord Byron als Dramatiker. 1877. Guiccioli, Teresa. Lord Byron juge par les t6moins de sa vie. Paris, 1868. Transl. as: My Recollections of Byron and those of eye-witnesses. 1869. Hamann, Albert. A short sketch of the life and works of Lord Byron. Berlin, 1895. 1910. Harnack, O. Puschkin und Byron. Zeitschr. fur vergl. Literaturgeschichte, I (1888). Rptd in Essays und Studien, Brunswick, 1899. [Haussonville, L. comtesse d'.] La Jeunesse de Lord Byron. Paris, 1872. Les Dernieres Annees de Lord Byron. Les Rives du lac de GeneveL'Italie-La Grece. Paris, 1874. Hayman, Henry. Lord Byron and the Greek patriots. Harper's Monthly Mag. Pp. 365-70. Feb. 1894. Hobhouse, J. C. Travels through Albania and other Provinces of Turkey... 1809, 1810, 1813. See, also, Broughton, Lord. Hodgson, J. T. Memoirs of F. Hodgson, with Letters from Byron, etc. 1878. Holthausen, F. Skandinavische Byron-Ubersetzungen. Englische Studien. Vol. xxv. (1898.) -- Tegner und Byron. Archiv. Vol. cI, p. 141. (1899.) Holzhausen, Paul. Napoleons Tod im Spiegel der zeitgenossischen Presse nnd Dichtung. Frankfort, 1902. - Lord Byron und seine deutschen Biographen. Beitrage zur Allg. Ztg. Nos. 174 and 175. 1903. - Bonaparte, Byron und die Briten. Frankfort, 1904. Hoops, Johannes. Lord Byrons Leben und Dichten. Frankfort, 1903. Hugo, V. Lord Byron et ses rapports avec la litt6rature actuelle. Annales romantiques. 1827-8. - Lord Byron. In La Muse francaise. Vol. II. Paris, 1814. Hunt, Leigh. Lord Byron and some of his contemporaries; with recollections of the author's life, and of his visit to Italy. 3 vols. Paris, 1828. Jeaffreson, John Cordy. The real Lord Byron. 2 vols. 1883. Jebb, R. C. Modern Greece. 1880. Jowett, H. Byron. [1884.] Kennedy, James. Conversations on Religion, with Lord Byron and others... previous to his lordship's death. 1830. Koeppel, Emil. Lord Byron. Berlin, 1903. - Lord Byrons Astarte. Englische Studien. Vol. xxx, pp. 193-203. 1902. Kolbing, E. Byron und Dupatys Lettres sur l'Italie. Englische Studien. Vol. x. (1892.) Kraeger, H. Lord Byron und Francesca da Rimini. Archiv. Vol. xcviII, pp. 463 f. (1897.) Der Byron'sche Heldentypus. (Forschungen zur neueren Literaturgeschichte, vol. vi.) Munich, 1898. Krause, F. Byrons Marino Faliero. Ein Beitrag zur vergleichenden Literaturgeschichte. Progr. Breslau, 1897. La Bourdelles, R. G. Leopardi; Lord Byron en Suisse, en Italie, et en Grece. 1901. Lake, J. W. The Life of Lord Byron. 1826,1827.396

Bibliography

[CH.

Laurent, E. Byron. 1899. Leigh, Elizabeth Medora. Medora Leigh; a history and an autobiography. Ed. Mackay, C. 1869.' Leonard, W. E. Byron and Byronism in America. Columbia Univ. Diss. 1905. Levi, E. Byron and Petrarch. Athenaeum. Nos. 3847, 3851. Lewes, Louis. Lord Byron. Hamburg, 1897. Lipnicki, E. Byron im Befreiungskampfe der polnischen Nationalliteratur. Das Magazin, 1877, pp. 301, 317, 334. Lockhart, J. S. Memoirs of the Life of Sir Walter Scott. 10 vols. Edinburgh, 1890. Lorenzo y d'Ayot, M. Shakespeare, Lord Byron y Chateaubriand, como modelos de la juventud literaria. Madrid, 1886. Lueder, A. Lord Byron's Urteile fiber Italien und seine Bewohner, ihre Sprache, Literatur und Kunst. 1893. Luther, A. Byron, Heine, Leopardi. Drei Vortrage. (Lord Byron und seine Helden.) 1904. Macaulay, T. B. Lord. Lord Byron. 1853. MacMahan, Anna B. (ed.). With Byron in Italy: a selection of the poems and letters... relating to his life in Italy. 1907. Maychrzak, F. Lord Byron als Ubersetzer. Altenburg, 1895. Mayne, E. C. Byron. 2 vols. 1912. Mazure, A. Etude morale sur Lord Byron et sur son influence a regard de la litterature contemporaine en France. In Revue anglo-francaise. Vol. I. Poitiers, 1833. Mazzoni, G. I1 Ottocento. Storia letteraria d'Italia. Pp. 710 ff. Medwin, T. Journal of the Conversations of Lord Byron. 1824. Cf. Murray, J. Notes on Capt. Medwin's Conversations with Lord Byron. 1847. Megyery, I. Lord Byron. Plletrajz-tanulmany. 1889. Melchior, F. H. Heines Verhaltnis zu Lord Byron. (Literarhistorische Forschungen, vol. xxvII.) Leipzig, 1902. Meneghetti, Nazzareno. Lord Byron a Venezia. Venice, [1910]. Milbanke, Ralph (Earl of Lovelace). Astarte. A Fragment of Truth concerning George Gordon Byron... recorded by his grandson. 1905. Miller, Barnette. Leigh Hunt's Relations with Byron, etc. New York, 1910. [Columbia Univ. Studies in English.] Millingen, Julius. Memoirs of the affairs of Greece; containing an account of the military and political events... with various anecdotes relating to Lord Byron, and an account of his last illness and death. 1831. Mitford, J. The Private Life of Lord Byron. [1836?.] Mondot, A. Histoire de la vie et des ecrits de Lord Byron. Paris, 1860. Monti, G. G. Studi critici. Florence, 1887. (11 prigioniero di Chillon di Byron e il Conte Ugolino di Dante; G. Leopardi e Giorgio Byron.) Moore, J. S. Byron: his biographers and critics. 1869. Morley, J. Byron. (Byron and the French Revolution.) Fortnightly Review. Dec. 1870. Muoni, G. La Fama del Byron e il Byronismo in Italia. Milan, 1903. Murray, J. Lord Byron and his Detractors. 1906. Narrative, A, of the circumstances which attended the separation of Lord and Lady Byron; remarks on his domestic conduct, and a complete refutation of the calumnies circulated by public writers. 1816. Nettement, A. F. Histoire de la litterature frangaise sous la Restauration. Vol. i, pp. 236 ff. Paris, 1853. Niccolini, G. Vita di Giorgio Lord Byron. 1835.7Er



II] Byron 397 Nichol, J. Byron. English Men of Letters Series. 1880. Nisard, D. Lord Byron et la societe anglaise. Revue des Deux Mondes. 1 Nov., pp. 413-48. Paris, 1850. Nodier, Ch. Introduction to A. Pichot's translation of the (Euvres completes de Byron. Paris, 1823. Noel, Roden. Life of Byron. [Bibliography by Anderson, J. P.] 1890. Ochsenbein, W. Die Aufnahme Lord Byrons in Deutschland und sein Einfluss auf den jungen Heine. (Untersuchungen zur neueren Sprach- und Literaturgeschichte, vol. vI.) Berne, 1905. Parry, W. The Last Days of Lord Byron; with his Lordship's opinions on various subjects. 1825. Polidori, J. W. The Diary of Dr John William Polidori, 1816, relating to Byron, Shelley, etc. Ed. Rossetti, W. M. 1911. Ponitz, Arthur. Byron und die Bibel. Diss. Berlin, 1906. Preston, E. W. Lord Byron vindicated. 1876. Prothero, R. E. The goddess of wisdom and Lady Caroline Lamb. Monthly Review, June, 1905. - (ed.). Letters and Journals. 6 vols. See Works. 1898-1904. Pudbres, Anna. Lord Byron, Admirer and Imitator of Alfieri. Englische Studien. Vol. xxxIIi, pp. 40-83. 1904. Pughe, F. H. Studien iiber Byron und Wordsworth. (Anglistische Forschungen, vol. vm.) 1902. Rabbe, Felix. Les Maltresses authentiques de Lord Byron. Paris, 1890. Roe, John C. Some obscure and disputed points in Byronic biography. Diss. Leipzig, 1893. Roever, F. Lord Byrons Gedanken fiber Alexander Popes Dichtkunst. Erlangen, 1886. Salvo, C. de. Lord Byron en Italic et en Grece; un apergu de sa vie et de ses ouvrages. 1825. Schipper, J. Lord Byron und die Frauen. Beitrage und Studien z. engl. Kultur- u. Literaturgeschichte. Pp. 307-71. Vienna and Leipzig, 1908. Schmidt, 0. Rousseau und Byron. Ein Beitrag zur vergleichenden Literaturgeschichte des Revolutionszeitalters. 1890. Scholkopf, Artur. Das Naturgefiihl in Lord Byrons Dichtungen. Progr., Oberrealschule Cannstatt. 1909. Scott, Sir Walter. Character of Lord Byron. (The Pamphleteer, vol. xxiv.) 1824. - Familiar Letters. 2 vols. Edinburgh, 1894. S6che, A. et Bertaut, J. La vie anecdotique et pittoresque des grands ecrivains. Lord Byron. 1909. Shaw, A. The authentic portraits of Byron. The Connoisseur, July (pt I) pp. 155-62; Aug. (pt ii) pp. 251-60. 1911. Simhart, Max. Lord Byrons Einfluss auf die italienische Literatur. (Munchener Beitrage zur romanischen und englischen Philologie, vol. XLV.) Leipzig, 1909. Sinzheimer, S. Goethe und Lord Byron. Eine Darstellung der persinlichen und literarischen Verhaltnisse mit Beriicksichtigung des Faust und Manfred. Diss. Munich, 1894. Spasowicz, W. BalipoHuH MT y yIImy iuma 1 J.epouHToBa. C% npGzpomeuieMi EpaTuor 6iorpaqiii,iopa Ba'Ipoua cocTaBseHnolno B. CTenaHnjeMi. IITepaTypHaa Bii6.ioTeKa, no. 5. Vilna, 1911. Stendhal. Lord Byron en Italie et en France. R6cit d'un t6moin oculaire. 1816. In Revue de Paris. 1830.398 Bibliography [CH. Storoschenko, N. J. Byrons Einfluss auf die europiiische Literatur. (In Iz oblasti literatury. Moscow, 1902.) Stowe, Harriet Beecher. Lady Byron vindicated. A history of the Byron controversy. Boston [U.S.A.], 1870. Stowe-Byron Controversy, The. A complete r6sume of all that has been written and said upon the subject... together with an impartial review of the merits of the case. By the editor of Once a Week [Dallas, E. S.]. [1869.] Street, G. S. A Book of Essays. 1902. - Books and things. 1905. - The Ghosts of Piccadilly. 1907. Swinburne, A. C. Byron. Essays and Studies. 1875. Taine, H. Histoire de la Litterature Anglaise. 4 vols. Paris, 1863-4. Toynbee, P. J. Dante in English Literature. Vol. n, pp. 31-55. 1909. Treitschke, H. von. Lord Byron und der Radicalismus. (Preussische Jahrbiicher, 1863.) Historische und politische Aufsatze. Vol. I, pp. 305 ff. 1871. Trelawny, E. J. Records [Recollections] of Shelley, Byron and the Author. 1858. 2 vols. 1878. [1906.] Trent, W. P. The Byron Revival. The Forum. Vol. xxvI, pp. 242-56. 1898. Tribolati, Felice. Lord Byron a Pisa. Nuova Antologia. Pp. 631-65. July 1874. Veselovsky, A. N. Bafipoub 6iorpa4Hruecnifi o0epIu. Moscow, 1902. 2nd edn. 1914. Viennet, I. P. G. Byron. In Minerve litteraire. Vol. i. Paris, 1820. Vigny, A. de. (Euvres de Lord Byron. In Le Conservateur litteraire. Vol. III. Paris, 1820. Villemain, A. F. Article on Byron in Biographie Universelle: Supplement. Paris, 1835. Rptd in Etudes de litt6ratures anciennes et etrangeres. Paris, 1846. Weddigen, F. H. 0. Lord Byrons Einfluss auf die europaische Literatur der Neuzeit. Hanover, 1884. New edn. 1901. Lord Byrons Einfluss auf die franzosische Literatur. Archiv. Vol. LXIX. (1883.) Weiser, Carl. Popes Einfluss auf Byrons Jugenddichtungen. Halle, 1877. Wenzel, G. Miltons und Byrons Satan. Archiv. Vol. LXXXIII, p. 71. 1884. Westenholz, F. von. Uber Byrons historische Dramen. Stuttgart, 1890. Wetz, W. Neuere Beitrage zur Byron-Biographie. Cologne, 1905. Williams, Edward Ellerker. Journal of E. E. W...., companion of Shelley and Byron in 1821 and 1822, etc. 1902. Zabel, E. Byrons Kenntnis von Shakespeare und sein Urteil fiber ihn. Halle, 1904. Zdziechowski, M. Karl Hynek Macha und Byrons Einfluss auf die tschechische Dichtkunst. Anz. d. Akad. der Wiss. in Krakau. Cracow. 1893. - Byron i jego wiek. Studya porownawczo-literackie. 2 vols. Cracow. 1894-7. Ziehen, J. Byronstudien zur Geschichte des Philhellenismus. Berichte des freien deutschen Hochstifts. Vol. II. Frankfort, (1896).

G. A. BROWN and J. G. ROBERTSON.III] S/heley 399 CHAPTER III SHELLEY I. COLLECTED WORKS Works. Ed. Shelley, Mrs. 2 pts. 1847. Works. With memoir by Hunt, Leigh. Ed. Shepherd, R. H. 4 series. 1871-5. Works in verse and prose. Ed. Forman, H. B. 8 vols. 1880. Relics of Shelley. Ed. Garnett, R. 1862. Note Books of Percy Bysshe Shelley. From the originals in the library of W. K. Bixby. Deciphered, transcribed, and edited, with a full commentary, by Forman, H. B. Privately ptd for members of the Bibliophile Soc. 3 vols. Boston, 1911. II. POETICAL WORKS: COLLECTED EDITIONS Poetical Works of Coleridge, Shelley and Keats. Paris, 1829. Poetical Works. 2 vols. 1834,1836. 2 vols. 1839. Poetical Works. Edited, with Notes, by Mrs Shelley. 4 vols. 1839. 1 vol. 1840. With memoir by Lowell, J. R. 3 vols. Boston, 1855,1889. Poetical Works. Ed., with memoir, by Rossetti, W. M. 2 vols. 1870. 3 vols. 1878. Poetical Works. Ed. Scott, W. B. [1874,] [1880.] Poetical Works. Ed. Forman, H. B. 4 vols. 1876. 2 vols. 1882. With memoir. 5 vols. (Aldine edn.) 1892. Poetical Works. Ed. Shepherd, R.H. 3 vols. 1888. Poetical Works. Ed. Dowden, E. 1890,1896,1900. Complete Poetical Works. Ed., with memoir, by Woodberry, G. E. 4 vols. 1892. Complete Poetical Works. Ed. Hutchinson, T. Oxford, 1904, 1905,1907. Poems. Ed. Locock, C. D. 4vols. 1906. Poems. Ed. Locock, C. D. With introduction by Clutton-Brock, A. 2 vols. 1911. Shelley's poems were translated into French by Rabbe, F., 3 vols. Paris, 1885-7; into German by Seybt, J., Leipzig, 1844; Strodtmann, A., Hildburghausen, 1866; into Italian, Milan, 1858; Naples, 1878; into Russian, 1895, etc. III. POETICAL WORKS: SELECTIONS A Selection from the Poems of P. B. Shelley. Ed. with memoir by Blind, Mathilde. 1872. Poems from Shelley. Ed. Brooke, Stopford A. (Golden Treasury series.) 1880, 1906. Poems selected from Shelley. Ed. Garnett, R. (Parchment Library.) 1880. Lyric Poems. Ed. Rhys, E. 1895. Poems. Selected and ed. by Forman, H. B. (Temple Classics.) 1899. Poems. Introduction by Raleigh, Sir W. 1902. Poems. Introduction by Meynell, A. 1903.400 Bibliography [CH. Poems. Selected by Collins, J. C. 1907. Select Poems. Ed., with introduction and notes, by Woodberry, G. E. (Belles Lettres series.) Boston and London, 1908. IV. SEPARATE POETICAL WORKS Original Poetry. By Victor and Cazire [Percy Bysshe Shelley and Elizabeth Shelley]. Worthing, 1810. Ed. Garnett, R. 1898. Posthumous Fragments of Margaret Nicholson: being Poems found among the papers of that noted female who attempted the Life of the King in 1786. Edited by John Fitz-Victor. Oxford, 1810. Privately rptd by Forman, H. B. 1877. A Poetical Essay on the Existing State of Things. By a Gentleman of the University of Oxford. 1811. The Devil's Walk; a Ballad. (Broadside.) [1812.] Queen Mab; a Philosophical Poem: with Notes. 1813. Alastor; or, The Spirit of Solitude: and other Poems. 1816. Facsimile repr. Ed. Dobell, B. 1885. Translated into French by Beljame, A. Paris, 1895. Laon and Cythna; or, The Revolution of the Golden City. A Vision of the Nineteenth Century. In the Stanza of Spenser. 1818 [ptd 1817]. Suppressed and reissued in a revised form as The Revolt of Islam; a Poem, in twelve Cantos. 1818. The same sheets issued again, with a new title-page. 1829. Rosalind and Helen, a Modern Eclogue; with other Poems. 1819. Ed. Forman, H. B. (Shelley soc.) 1888. The Cenci. A Tragedy, in five acts. Italy, 1819. 2nd edn. 1821, 1827. Ed. Forman, A. and H. B. With prologue by Todhunter, J. (Shelley soc.) 1886. Ed. Woodberry, G. E. (Belles Lettres series.) Boston, 1909. Translated into French, 1883; into German, 1837; into Italian, 1892. Prometheus Unbound. A Lyrical Drama in four acts. With other Poems. 1820. Ed. Dickinson, G. L. (Temple Dramatists.) 1898. Ed. Hughes, A. M. D. Oxford, 1910. Translated into German, 1876, 1887; into Italian, 1892, 1894. Oedipus Tyrannus; or, Swellfoot the Tyrant. A Tragedy. In two acts. Translated from the original Doric. 1820. Epipsychidion. Verses addressed to the Noble and Unfortunate Lady Emilia - now Imprisoned in the Convent of -. 1821. Facsimile repr., with introduction by Brooke, S. A. and a note by Swinburne, A. C. Ed. Potts, R. A. (Shelley soc.) 1887. Italian trans. 1893. Adonais. An Elegy on the Death of John Keats. Pisa, 1821. Cambridge, 1829. Facsimile rpt. Ed. Wise, T. J. (Shelley soc.) 1886. Ed. Rossetti, W. M. and Prickard, A. O. Oxford, 1903. Rpt of first edn (1821). 1904. Hellas. A Lyrical Drama. 1822. Ed. Wise, T. J. (Shelley soc.) 1886. Poetical Pieces. 1823. Posthumous Poems. [Ed. by Mrs Shelley.] 1824. Miscellaneous and Posthumous Poems. 1826. Miscellaneous Poems. 1826. The Masque of Anarchy. A Poem. Now first published, with a preface by Leigh Hunt. 1832. Facsimile of the holograph MS. Ed. Forman, H. B. (Shelley soc.) 1887. The Daemon of the World. The First Part as published in 1816 with Alastor, The Second Part deciphered and now first printed from his own manuscript revision and interpolation in the newly discovered copy of Queen Mab. Privately ptd by Forman, H. B. 1876.III] Sheiley o40 The Wandering Jew. Ed. Dobell, B. (Shelley soc.) 1887. Shelley's Skylark. A facsimile of the original MS, with a note on other MSS of Shelley in Harvard College Library. Cambridge, Mass., 1888. V. PROSE WORKS: COLLECTED EDITIONS AND SELECTIONS Essays, Letters from Abroad, Translations, and Fragments. Edited by Mrs Shelley. 2 vols. 1840. New edn. 2 vols. 1852. Prose Works. Collected and edited by Forman, H. B. 4 vols. 1880. Essays and Letters of Shelley. Ed. Rhys, E. 1886,1905. Prose Works. Ed. Shepherd, R. H. 2 vols. 1888,1912. Shelley's Literary and Philosophical Criticism. Ed. Shawcross, J. Oxford, 1909. Shelley's Prose in the Bodleian MSS. Ed. Koszul, A. H. 1910. VI. SEPARATE PROSE WORKS Zastrozzi. A Romance. By P. B. S. 1810. St Irvyne; or, The Rosicrucian. A Romance. By a Gentleman of the University of Oxford. 1811. Reissued 1822. The Necessity of Atheism. Worthing, [1811]. An Address to the Irish People. Dublin, 1812. Ed. Wise, T. J. With introduction by Rolleston, T. W. (Shelley soc.) 1890. Proposals for an association of those philanthropists, who convinced of the inadequacy of the moral and political state of Ireland to produce benefits which are nevertheless attainable, are willing to unite to accomplish its regeneration. Dublin, [1812]. Declaration of Rights. (Broadside.) [Dublin, 1812.] Rptd. (Philobiblon soc. Miscellanies, vol. xII.) 1868-9. A Letter to Lord Ellenborough.... [1812.] A Vindication of Natural Diet. 1813. New edn. (Shelley soc.) 1884. A Refutation of Deism, in a Dialogue. 1814. A Proposal for putting Reform to the Vote throughout the Kingdom. By the Hermit of Marlow. 1817. Facsimile of the holograph MS. Ed. Forman, H. B. (Shelley soc.) 1887. An Address to the People on the Death of the Princess Charlotte. [1817.] Rptd [1843?]. History of a Six Weeks' Tour.... 1817. [Written in collaboration with Mrs Shelley.] With commentary by Elton, C. I. 1894. Notes on Sculptures in Rome and Florence: together with a Lucianic fragment and a criticism of Peacock's poem Rhododaphne. Ed. Forman, H. B. (Privately ptd.) 1879. Review of Hogg's Memoirs of Prince Alexy Haimatoff. Together with an extract from some early writings of Shelley. By Dowden, E. Ed. Wise, T. J. (Shelley soc.) 1886. VII. LETTERS Southey, R. Correspondence with Caroline Bowles. Together with his Correspondence with Shelley, etc. Ed. Dowden, E. 1881. Select Letters. With introduction by Garnett, R. 1882. Letters to Jane Clairmont. [Privately ptd.] 1889. Letters to Elizabeth Hitchener. 2 vols. [Privately ptd.] 1890. Letters to Williamn Godwin. 2 vols. [Privately ptd.] 1891. Letters to Leigh Hunt. Ed. Wise, T. J. 2 vols., [Privately ptd.] 1894. Letters to T. J. Hogg. With notes by Rossetti, W. M. and Forman, H. B. [Privately ptd.] 1897. E. L. XII. 26402 Bibliograp/y [CH. Letters to Elizabeth Hitchener. Ed. Dobell, B. 1909. The Letters of Shelley. Ed. Ingpen, R. 2 vols. 1909. New edn. 2 vols. 1912. VIII. BIOGRAPHY AND CRITICISM Ackermann, R. Quellen zu Shelley's poetischen Werken. Erlangen, 1890. - Lucans Pharsalia in den Dichtungen Shelleys. Zweibriicken, 1896. - Percy Bysshe Shelley, der Mann, der Dichter, und seine Werke. Dortmund, 1906. Shelley in Frankreich und Italien. Englische Studien. Vol. xvII. 1893. Angeli, H. R. Shelley and his friends in Italy. 1911. Arnold, M. Essays in Criticism. Second Series. 1888. Asanger, F. P. B. Shelleys Sprachstudien. Leipzig, 1911. Bagehot, W. Literary Studies. New edn. Vol. I. 1895. Bates, E. S. A study of Shelley's drama The Cenci. New York, 1908. Baynes, Spencer. Edinburgh Review. April, 1871. Bernthsen, S. Der Spinozismus in Shelleys Weltanschauung. In Anglia. 1901. Uber den Einfluss des Plinius in Shelleys Jugendwerken. Engl. Studien. Vol. xxx. 1902. Biagi, G. Gli ultimi giorni di P. B. Shelley. Florence, 1892. English trans. 1898. Bradley, A. C. Notes on passages in Shelley. Modern Language Review. Vol. I. Cambridge, 1906. On The Triumph of Life. Ibid. Vol. Ix. Cambridge, 1914. Shelley's View of Poetry. In Oxford Lectures on Poetry. Oxford, 1909. Short bibliography of Shelley. In Short bibliographies of Wordsworth, etc. English Association Leaflet, no. 23. Oxford, 1912. Brailsford, H. N. Shelley and Godwin. (Home University Library.) [1913.] Brandes, G. Main Currents of 19th Century Literature. Vol. Iv. (Naturalism in England.) 1905. Brooke, S. A. The Lyrics of Shelley, etc. Studies in Poetry. 1907. Rptd 1910. Browning, R. Address to Shelley. Pauline (1833). Works. Ed. Kenyon, Sir F. G. Essay on Shelley. Prefixed to Letters of P. B. Shelley [for the most part spurious]. 1852. Ed. Harden, W. T. (Shelley soc.) 1888. Ed. Garnett, R. 1903. Calcanio, J. Tres poetas pesimistas del siglo xIx (Byron, Shelley, Leopardi). 1907. Calvert, G. H. Coleridge, Shelley, Goethe. Boston, 1880. Chevrillon, A. Etudes anglaises. La nature dans la po6sie de Shelley. 1901. Chiarini, G. Studi e ritratti letterari. 1900. Clutton-Brock, A. Shelley, the Man and the Poet. 1910. Cordier, H. P. B. Shelley. 1900. Dowden, E. Life of Shelley. 2 vols. 1886. Revised and condensed. 1896. See The Quarterly Review, April 1887; The Athenaeum, 14 May 1887. Last Words on Shelley. In Transcripts and Studies. 1888. Droop, A. Die Belesenheit P. B. Shelleys. Berlin, 1906. Druskowitz, H. Percy Bysshe Shelley. Berlin, 1884. Edgar, P. A Study of Shelley. Toronto, 1899. Eimer, MI. Die personlichen Beziehungen zwischen Byron und den Shelleys. Anglistisehe Forschungen. Vol. xxxII. Heidelberg, 1910.III] S e/ley 403 Ellis, F. S. An alphabetical table of contents to Shelley's poetical works. (Shelley soc.) 1888. A lexical Concordance to the Poetical Works of Shelley. 1892. Elsner, P. P. B. Shelleys Abhangigkeit von W. Godwins Political Justice. Berlin, 1906. Elton, C. I. An account of Shelley's visits to France, Switzerland and Savoy in the years 1814 and 1816. 1894. Elton, O. A Survey of English Literature (1780-1830). 1912. Fliigel, E. Shelley's Sophocles. Anglia. Vol. xxIv. 1901. Forman, H. B. The Shelley Library. An Essay in Bibliography. I. Shelley's own books, pamphlets, and broadsides; posthumous separate issues, and posthumous books wholly or mainly by him. (Shelley soc.) 1886. Gilfillan, G. P. B. Shelley. Galleries of literary portraits. Vol. i. 1856. Godwin, W. The Elopement of Shelley and Mary Wollstonecraft Godwin, as narrated by W. Godwin. Ed. Forman, H. B. [Privately ptd.] 1911. Graham, W. Last Links with Byron, Shelley, and Keats. 1898. Gribble, F. The romantic life of Shelley, and the sequel. 1911. Hime, H.. L. The Greek Materials of Shelley's Adonais. 1888. Hogg, T. J. Life of Shelley. 2 vols. 1858. Ed. Dowden, E. 1906. Shelley at Oxford. Ed. Streatfeild, R. A. 1904. Hughes, A. M. D. Shelley's Zastrozzi and St Irvyne. Shelley's Witch of Atlas. Modern Language Review. Vol. VII. Cambridge, 1912. The nascent mind of Shelley. Englische Studien. Vol. XLV. Leipzig, 1912. Hunt, Leigh. Lord Byron and his Contemporaries. 1828. - Account of Shelley. Autobiography. 3 vols. 1850. Hunt, Thornton. Atlantic Monthly. 1863. Imelmann, R. Shelleys Alastor und Goethe. Zeitschrift fur vergl. Litteraturgesch. Vol. xvII. 1909. Jack, A. A. Shelley: an essay. 1904. Jeaffreson, J. C. The Real Shelley. 2 vols. 1885. Kellner, L. Shelley's Prometheus in deutscher Ubersetzung. Englische Studien. Vol. xxI. 1896. - Shelley's Queen Mab and Volney's Les Ruines. Englische Studien. Vol. XXII. 1898. Koszul, A. H. La Jeunesse de Shelley. Paris, 1910. Kroder, A. Shelley's Verskunst. Miinchener Beitrage. Vol. xxVII. Erlangen, 1903. Kuhns, 0. Dante's Influence on Shelley. Mod. Language Notes. Vol. XII. 1898. Locock, C. D. An examination of the Shelley MSS in the Bodleian Library. Oxford, 1903. MacCarthy, Denis Florence. Shelley's Early Life from original sources. [1872.] Masson, D. Wordsworth, Shelley, Keats, and other Essays. 1874. Maurer, O. Shelley und die Frauen. Literarhistorische Forschungen. Vol. xxxIIr. Berlin, 1906. Mayor, J. B. A classification of Shelley's Metres. 1888. Medwin, T. The Shelley Papers. Memoir of Percy Bysshe Shelley. By T. Medwin, Esq. And Original Poems and Papers by Percy Bysshe Shelley. Now first collected. 1833. - Life of Shelley. 2 vols. 1847. Ed. Forman, H. B. Oxford, 1913. Middleton, C. S. Shelley and his writings. 2 vols. 1858. Moore, T. Letters and Journals of Byron, with notices of his life. 2 vols. 1830. 26-2404 Bibliography [CH. Myers, F. W. H. Selections with introduction. In Ward, T. H., English Poets. Vol. Iv. 1880. Paul, C. K. William Godwin: his friends and contemporaries. 2 vols. 1876. Peacock, T. L. Memoirs of Shelley. Works. Vol. III. 1875. Ed., with the Letters to Peacock, by Brett-Smith, H. F. B. Oxford, 1909. - T. L. Peacock on the portraits of Shelley. 1911. Platt, J. H. The Cosmic sense as manifested in Shelley and Whitman. The Conservator. 1894. Rabbe, F. Shelley: sa vie, ses euvres. Paris, 1887. English trans. 1888. Richter, H. Percy Bysshe Shelley. 1898. Rossetti, W. M. Memoir of Shelley, with new preface. 1886. Salt,H.S. Shelley Primer. (Shelley soc.) 1887. Percy Bysshe Shelley: a monograph. 1888. - Percy Bysshe Shelley: Poet and Pioneer. 1896. Sarrazin, G. Poetes modernes de l'Angleterre: Landor, Shelley, etc. Paris, 1885. Schelling, F. E. The English Lyric. (Types of English Literature series.) 1913. Schmitt, H. Shelley als Romantiker. Englisehe Studien. Vol. XLIV. Leipzig, 1911. Scott, R. P. The place of Shelley among the English poets of his time. Cambridge, 1878. Sharp, William. Life of Shelley [with bibliography by Anderson, J. P.]. 1887. Shelley, Jane, Lady. Shelley Memorials. 1859. 3rd edn. 1875. Shelley, Mary Wollstonecraft. Life and Letters. By Marshall, Mrs Julian. 2 vols. 1889. Shelley Society Publications. 1884-8. Slicer, J. R. P. B. Shelley. An appreciation. 1903. Smith, G. Barnett. Shelley: a critical biography. 1877. Sotheran, C. P. B. Shelley as a philosopher and reformer. 1876. Stawell, Miss M. On Shelley's The Triumph of Life. Essays and Studies by Members of the English Assoc. Vol. v. Oxford, 1914. Stephen, Sir L. Godwin and Shelley. Hours in a Library. Vol. III. 1892. Suddard, M. Keats, Shelley, and Shakespeare Studies. Cambridge, 1912. Swinburne, A. C. Les Cenci. Studies in Prose and Poetry. 1894. - Shelley. Chambers's Cyclopaedia of English Literature. Vol. III. 1903. Symonds, J. A. Shelley. (Men of Letters series.) 1878. Revised edn. 1887. Symons, A. The Romantic Movement in English Poetry. 1909. Thompson, Francis. Shelley. 1909. Todhunter, J. A Study of Shelley. 1880. Trelawney, E. J. Recollections of the last days of Shelley and Byron. 1858. Ed. Dowden, E. 1906. Records of Shelley, Byron, and the Author. 1878. Rptd. (New Universal Library,) 1905. -Letters. Ed. Forman, H. B. Oxford, 1910. Vaughan, C. The Influence of English Poetry upon the Romantic Revival on the Continent. Proceedings of the British Academy. Vol. vI. 1913-14, Vaughan, P. Early Shelley pamphlets. 1905.Y7 77

-.,

IIIj rone iey 405 Winstanley, L. Shelley as nature poet. Englische Studien. Vol. xxxiv. Leipzig, 1904. Platonism in Shelley. Essays and Studies by Members of the English Association. Vol. iv. Oxford, 1913. Woodberry, G. E. Notes on the MS volume of Shelley's Poems in the Library of Harvard College. Cambridge, Mass., 1889. Yeats, W. B. The Philosophy of Shelley's Poetry. Ideas of Good and Evil. 1903. Yolland, A. B. Shelley's poetry. Budapest, 1907. Young, A. B. Shelley and M. G. Lewis. Modern Language Review. Vol. I. Cambridge, 1906. - Shelley and Peacock. Modern Language Review. Vol. II. Cambridge, 1907. Zanella, G. Shelley e G. Leopardi. Nuova Antologia. Vol. I. 1881. Rptd in Paralleli letterari. Verona, 1885. Zettner, H. Shelleys Mythendichtung. 1904. A. T. B. CHAPTER IV KEATS I. COLLECTED EDITIONS Poetical Works of Coleridge, Shelley, and Keats. Paris, 1829. Poetical Works. With memoir by Milnes, R. M. (Lord Houghton). 1834. Poetical Works. 1840,1841. New edns: 1856,1863,1865,1866,1876 and 1879 (Aldine edn). Poetical Works. Ed. with a memoir by Rossetti, W. M. [1872], [1880]. Poetical Works. Ed. Scott, W. B. [1880], [1894]. Poetical Works, and other writings, now first brought together. Ed. Forman, H. B. 4 vols. 1883,1889. Suppl. 1890. Poems, with the annotations of Lord Houghton. Memoir by Speed, J. G. 2 vols. New York, 1883. Poetical Works. Ed. Forman, H. B. 1884,1898. Poems. Ed. Arnold, W. T. 1884,1907. Poems. Ed. Ellis, F. S. (Kelmscott Press.) 1894. Poems. Ed. Drury, G. Thorn, with introduction by Bridges, R. (The Muses Library.) 2 vols. 1896. Poems. Ed. Bates, Arlo. Boston, 1896. Poems. With introduction by Raleigh, Sir W. 1897. Poems. Ed. Holmes, C. J. Decorations by Ricketts, C. 2 vols. 1898. Complete Works. Ed. Forman, H. B. [With bibliography.] 5 vols. Glasgow, 1900-1. Poetical Works. Ed. Scott, W. S. 1902. Poems. Ed. Selincourt, E. de. 1905. 3rd edn. 1912. Poetical Works. Ed. with an Introduction and Textual Notes by Forman, H. B. Oxford, 1906, 1907, 1908. Poetical Works. Ed. Sampson, G. 1906. Poems. Ed. Colvin, Sir S. 2 vols. 1915. Poemes et Poesies. Traduction, precedee d'une etude, par Gallimard, P. 1910.406

Bibiography

[CH.

II. SELECTIONS Poetical Works [selected]. Ed. Palgrave, F. T. (Golden Treasury series.) 1884. Selected Poems. Ed. Hogben, J. (Canterbury poets.) 1885. The Odes of Keats. With notes, etc. by Downer, A. C. Oxford, 1897. Endymion and the longer Poems. Ed. Forman, H. B. (Temple Classics.) 1898. Poems. With Introduction by Meynell, A. 1903. Poems. With Introduction by Binyon, L. and Notes by Masefield, J. 1903. Poems. Selected and with Introduction by Synons, A. 1907. Poems of 1820. Edited by Robertson, Margaret. 1909. III. SEPARATE WORKS Poems. 1817. Endymion: a poetic romance. 1818. Lamia, Isabella, The Eve of St Agnes, and other Poems. 1820. Rptd in facsimile with introduction by Robertson, M. Oxford, 1909. Another version of Keats's Hyperion. Ed. Milnes, R. M. (Lord Houghton). Philobiblon Soc. Miscellanies. Vol. in. 1856-7. Keatsii Hyperionis libri tres. Latine reddidit C. Merivale. Cambridge, 1863. Hyperion. Mit Einleitung, hrsg von Hoops, J. Berlin, 1899. Hyperion. Facsimile of Keats's autograph manuscript. With notes by Selincourt, E. de. Oxford, 1905. Ode to a Nightingale. Ed. Wise, T. J. Privately ptd. 1884. Ode to a Nightingale. Facsimile of the autograph manuscript of the original version. In Colvin, S. A Morning's Work in a Hampstead Garden. The Monthly Review. March 1903. IV. LETTERS, ETC. Life, Letters, and Literary Remains. Ed. Milnes, R. M. (Lord Houghton). 2 vols. 1848. 2nd edn. 1867. Rptd (New Universal Library) 1906. Letters to Fanny Brawne written in 1819 and 1820. Ed. Forman, H. B. 1878. 2nd edn. 1889. Letters. Ed. Speed, J. G. New York, 1883. Letters. Ed. Colvin, S. 1891. Letters. Complete revised edn. Ed. Forman, H. B. 1895. Keats Letters, Papers, and other Relics. Ed. Williamson, G. C. With forewords by Watts-Dunton, T., and an introd. by Forman, H. B. 1914. V. BIOGRAPHY AND CRITICISM Angellier, A. De Joh. Keatsii vita et carminibus. Paris, 1892. Arnold, M. On the study of Celtic literature. 1867. Popular edn. 1900. Selections from Keats's Poems. With introduction. In Ward, T. H. English Poets. Vol. iv. 1880. Rptd in Essays in Criticism, Second series, 1888. Bookman, The. Keats Double Number. October 1906. Bradley, A. C. The Letters of Keats. In Oxford Lectures on Poetry. Oxford, 1909. Bridges, R. John Keats. A critical essay. Privately ptd. Rptd as introduction to the edn of the Poems in The Muses Library. 1896. Brooke, S. A. Studies in Poetry. 1907. Clarke, C. and 3I. Cowden. Recollections of Writers. 1878.IV]

Keats

407

Colvin, S. Keats. (English Men of Letters series.) 1887. - New Lights upon Keats. Times Literary Supplement. Feb. 1915. Dilke, C. W. Papers of a Critic. 2 vols. 1875. Dowden, E. Life of Shelley. 2 vols. 1886. Gay, H. N. John Keats e gli Inglesi a Roma. 1912. Geest, S. Der Sensualismus bei John Keats. 1908. Gilfillan. G. John Keats. Galleries of literary portraits. Vol. I. 1856. Gothein, M. John Keats. Leben und Werke. [With translations of the Poems.] Halle, 1897. Graham, W. Last Links with Byron, Shelley, and Keats. 1898. Hancock, A. E. John Keats. A literary biography. 1908. Haydon, B. R. Life of Haydon. By T. Taylor. 3 vols. 1853. 2nd edn. 1853. - orrespondence and Table-Talk. Ed. by his Son. 2 vols. 1876. Hinde, F. Appreciation of Keats. Essays and Poems. Liverpool, 1864. Hoops, J. Keats' Jugend und Jugendgedichte. Englische Studien. Vol. xxi. Leipzig, 1895. Hudson, W. H. Studies in Interpretation: Keats, etc. New York, 1896. Hunt, Leigh. Lord Byron and some of his contemporaries. 1828. 2nd edn. 2 vols. 1828. - Imagination and Fancy. 1844. 3rd edn. 1852. - Autobiography. 3 vols. 1850. Revised edn. 1860. Keats-Shelley Memorial, Rome. Bulletin and Review. 1910, etc. MacCracken, H. The Source of Keats's Eve of St Agnes. Modern Philology. Vol. v. Chicago, 1908. Mackail, J. W. Lectures on Poetry. 1912. Masson, D. Wordsworth, Shelley, Keats, and other Essays. 1874. Medwin, T. Journal of the Conversations of Lord Byron. 1824. L ife of Percy Bysshe Shelley. 2 vols. 1847. Nicoll, W. R. and Wise, T. J. Literary Anecdotes of the Nineteenth Century. Vol. II. 1896. Olivero, F. Keats and the minor poems of Milton. Englische Studien. Vol. XLIII. Leipzig, 1911. Saggi di letteratura inglese. [On Keats and other English writers, chiefly poets.] Bari, 1914. Owen, F. M. John Keats. A study. 1880. Procter, B. W. Autobiographical Fragment and biographical notes; with personal sketches of contemporaries, etc. 1877. Rannie, D. W. Keats's Epithets. Essays and Studies by Members of the English Association. Vol. III. Oxford, 1912. Rossetti, W. M. Life of John Keats. [With bibliography by Anderson, J. P.] (Great Writers series.) 1887. Sarrazin, G. Poetes modernes de l'Angleterre: Landor, Keats, etc. 1885. Selincourt, E. de and Bradley, A. C. Short bibliography of Keats. In Short bibliographies of Wordsworth, etc. English Association Leaflet, no. 23. Oxford, 1912. Severn, J. On the vicissitudes of Keats's fame. The Atlantic Monthly. 1863. - Life and Letters of Joseph Severn. By Sharp, W. 1892. Starick, O. P. Die Belesenheit von John Keats, und die Grundziige seiner literarischen Kritik. Berlin, 1910. Suddard, M. Keats, Shelley, and Shakespeare Studies. Cambridge, 1912. Swinburne, A. C. Miscellanies. 1886. Texte, J. Keats et le neo-hellenisme dans la poesie anglaise. In Etudes de litterature europ6enne. Paris, 1898.408 Bibliography [CH. Watson, W. Excursions in Criticism. 1893. Wolff, L. An Essay on Keats's treatment of the heroic rhythm and blank verse. Paris, 1909. - John Keats, sa vie et son oeuvre. Paris, 1910. A. T. B. CHAPTER V LESSER POETS, 1790-1837 The Poets and the Poetry of the Nineteenth Century. Ed. Miles, A. H. 10 vols. 1891-7. 10 vols. 1898. New edn, enlarged. 12 vols. 1905-7. I. SAMUEL ROGERS A. Works Poetical Works. 1856. Ed. with a memoir by Bell, E. (Aldine edn.) 1875. An Ode to Superstition, with some other Poems. 1786. The Pleasures of Memory, with other Poems. 1792. 9th edn. 1796. 15th edn. 1806. Transl. into French by Montemont, A., Paris, 1825. An Epistle to a Friend, with other Poems. 1798. The Voyage of Columbus. Privately ptd 1808. Published 1810. Poems. 1812, 1814. New edn. 1820. With steel engravings by Turner, J. M. W. and Stothard, T. 1834. Ed. with a memoir by Sharpe, S. (Routledge's Pocket Library.) 1860,1890. Reviewed in Quarterly Review, March 1813; and in Edinburgh Review, Oct. 1813. Jacqueline. A Poem. 1814. [Published with Byron's Lara.] Human Life. A Poem. 1819. Transl. into Italian by Paciotti, N., Turin, 1820. Italy. A Poem. 1822. Part II. 1828. With steel engravings by Turner, J. M. W. and Stothard, T. (Routledge's Pocket Library.) 1830, 1890. Recollections of the Table-Talk of Samuel Rogers, with Memoir of his Life. [Ed. Dyce, A.] To which is added Porsoniana. [By Maltby, W.] 1856. 3rd edn. 1856. Rptd 1887. Recollections by Samuel Rogers. [Ed. Sharpe, W.] 1859. 2nd edn. 1859. Reminiscences and Table-Talk of Samuel Rogers. Collected by Powell, G. H. 1903. B. Biography and Criticism Clayden, P. W. The early life of Samuel Rogers. 1887. -- Rogers and his contemporaries. 2 vols. 1889. Eastlake, Lady. On Samuel Rogers. Quarterly Review. October 1888. Hayward, A. Samuel Rogers. Edinburgh Review. July 1856. Rptd in Biographical and Critical Essays, vol. I, 1858. Roberts, R. E. Samuel Rogers and his Circle. 1910. Roscoe, W. C. The Conversation and Poetry of Rogers. National Review. April 1856. Rptd in Poems and Essays, vol. iI, 1860.v]

Lesser Poets, 1790  837

409

II. THOMAS CAMPBELL A. Poetical Works Poems. 1805. [Issued by subscription.] Poetical Works. With biographical sketch by Irving, Washington. 2 vols. Albany, 1810. Another edn. Philadelphia, 1815. Miscellaneous Poems. 1824. Poetical Works, now first collected. 2 vols. 1828. New edn. 2 vols. 1833. Poetical Works. Illustrated by Turner, J. M. W. 1837. Poetical Works. New and improved edn. Edinburgh, 1837. Poetical Works, with notes and a biographical sketch by Hill, W. A. Illustrated by Turner, J. M. W. 1851. Complete Poetical Works. With an original biography and notes. Ed. Sargent, E. Boston, Mass., 1854. Poems, with a memoir by Rogers, C. 1871. Poetical Works. Ed. Rossetti, W. M. 1871. Rptd 1880. Poetical Works. Ed. Hill, W. A. With a sketch of Campbell's life by Allingham, W. (Aldine edn.) 1875. Selected Poems. With prefatory notice by Hogben, J. (Canterbury poets.) 1885. Poems. Selected by Campbell, L. (Golden Treasury series.) 1904. Complete Poetical Works. Ed. with notes by Robertson, J. L. Oxford, 1907. The Pleasures of Hope, with other Poems. Edinburgh, 1799. 6th edn. Edinburgh, 1802. 9th edn. Edinburgh, 1807. Transl. into German by Lachmann, K., Hamburg, 1838. Gertrude of Wyoming: A Pennsylvanian Tale, and other Poems. 1809. 2nd edn. 2 vols. 1810. 7th edn. 1819. Ed. Fitzgibbon, H. M. Oxford, 1889. Transl. into German by Finck, J., Baden-Baden, 1882. Reviewed in Quarterly Review, May 1809; and in Edinburgh Review, April 1809. Theodric: A Dramatic Tale, and other Poems. 1824. Reviewed in Blackwood's Magazine, Jan. 1825; and in Edinburgh Review, Jan. 1825. The Pilgrim of Glencoe, and other Poems. 1842. B. Other Works Annals of Great Britain from the ascension of George iii to the Peace of Amiens. 3 vols. Edinburgh, 1807. Specimens of the British Poets, with biographical and critical notices, and an Essay on English poetry. 7 vols. 1819. 2nd edn. Ed. Cunningham, P. 1841. An Essay on English Poetry, with notices of the British Poets. 3rd edn. Ed. Cunningham, P. 1848. Addresses in the University of Glasgow in 1827-8. Included in Hay, J. B. Inaugural Addresses by Lords Rectors of the University of Glasgow. Glasgow, 1839. Life of Mrs Siddons. 2 vols. 1834. Letters from the South. 2 vols. 1837. The Dramatic Works of William Shakspeare. With remarks on his life and writings by Campbell, T. 1838. The Scenic Annual for 1838. Ed. Campbell, T. 1838.410 Bibliography [CH. Life of Petrarch. 2 vols. 1841. 2nd edn. 2 vols. 1843. Frederick the Great and his Times. 4 vols. 1842-3. History of our own Times. Vols. I, II. 1843-5. C. Biography and Criticism Beattie, W. Life and Letters of Thomas Campbell. 3 vols. 1849. Gilfillan, G. Thomas Campbell. Galleries of literary portraits. Vol. I. 1856. Hadden, J. C. Thomas Campbell. (Famous Scots series.) Edinburgh, 1899. Hall, S. C. Retrospect of a long life. Vol. I. 1883. Hazlitt, W. The Spirit of the Age. Works. Edd. Waller, A. R. and Glover, A. Vol. iv. 1902. Redding, C. Literary reminiscences and memoirs of Thomas Campbell. 2 vols. 1860. Saintsbury, G. English War Songs-Campbell. Essays in English Literature, 1780-1860. 2nd series. 1895. III. THOMAS MOORE A. Poetical WIorks 1. Collections Poetical Works. Ed., with life, by Lake, J. W. 6 vols. Paris, 1827. Poetical Works, collected by himself. 10 vols. 1840-1. Poetical Works. Ed. Rossetti, W. M. 1872,1880. Poetical Works. Ed. with memoir by Kent, C. 1879, 1883. Poems. Selected by Falkiner, C. L. (Golden Treasury series.) 1903. Poetical Works. Ed. Godley, A. D. Oxford, 1910. Poetische Werke. Deutsch von Oelckers, T. 2te Ausg. 5 vols. Leipzig, 1843. 2. Separate Poetical Works Odes of Anacreon translated into English verse, with notes, by Thomas Moore. 1800. 4th edn. 2 vols. 1804. 9th edn. 2 vols. 1815. Reviewed in Edinburgh Review, July 1803. The Poetical Works of the late Thomas Little, Esq. (Preface signed T.M[oore].) 1801. 11th edn. 1813. 15th edn. 1822. Epistles, Odes, and other Poems. 1806. 4th edn. 2 vols. 1814. 6th edn. 2 vols. 1822. A Selection of Irish Melodies, with symphonies and accompaniments by Sir John Stevenson. Ten parts. 1807-34. Irish Melodies, and a Melologue upon National Music. Dublin, 1820. [First edn. of the words only.] London, 1821. 2nd edn. 1822. Illustrated by Maclise, D. 1846. With introduction by Gwynn, S. (The Muses Library.) 1908. Transl. into French by Jousselin, H., ed. Janin, J., Paris, 1869; into German by Hinrichsen, A., Giistrow, 1884; into Irish, Dublin, 1842; into Italian by Supino, I., Pisa, 1880; into Latin by Torre, N. Lee, 1835, and Leamington, 1857-9; into Swedish, Stockholm, 1825. Reviewed in Blackwood's Magazine, Jan. 1822; and in Quarterly Review, June 1812 and Oct. 1822.v]

Lesser Poets, 1790 1837

4 I

Corruption and Intolerance. Two Poems, with notes, addressed to an Englishman by an Irishman. 1808. 2nd edn. 1809. The Sceptic. A philosophical satire. 1809. M. P., or the Blue Stocking. A Comic Opera. 1811. Intercepted Letters, or the Two-penny Post-Bag. By Thomas Brown, jun. 1813. 8th edn. 1813. 11th edn. 1813. A Selection of Popular National Airs, with symphonies and accompaniments by Sir John Stevenson, Mus.Doc. The Words by Thomas Moore. Six parts. [1815, etc.] Sacred Songs, Duetts, and Trios. The Words by Thomas Moore. The Music composed and selected by Sir John Stevenson and Mr Moore. Two parts. 1816. Lines on the death of - [R. B. Sheridan]. 1816. Lalla Rookh. An Oriental Romance. 1817. 6thedn. 1817. 15th edn. 1829. Illustrated by Tenniel, John. 1861. Transl. into Danish by Lemboke, E., Copenhagen, 1878; into Dutch by Lennep, J. van, 1834; into French by Wilder, V., Paris, 1888; into German by La Motte Fouque, F. de, Vienna, 1825, and by Pechlin, F. von, Frankfort, 1830; into Italian by Camisani, G., Milan, 1872, and by Maffei, A., Milan, 1886; also into Icelandic and Polish. Reviewed in Blackwood's Magazine, June 1817; in Edinburgh Review, by Jeffrey, 1817. The Fudge Family in Paris. Ed. by Thomas Brown, the younger. 1818. 8th edn. 1818. Reviewed in Blackwood's Magazine, May 1818. Tom Crib's Memorial to Congress. With a preface, notes, and an appendix. By One of the Fancy. 1819. 3rd edn. 1819. Fables for the Holy Alliance; Rhymes on the Road, etc. By Thomas Brown, the younger. 1823. The Loves of the Angels. A Poem. 1823. 5th edn. 1823. Transl. into French by Ostrowski, J. K., 1837: into Italian, Milan 1882; and into several other European languages. Evenings in Greece. [1825.] Odes upon Cash, Corn, Catholics, and other matters. Selected from the columns of The Times. 1828. Legendary Ballads. [1830.] The Summer Fete. A Poem, with Songs. [1831.] The Fudges in England, being a sequel to the Fudge Family in Paris. By Thomas Brown, the younger. 1835. 2nd edn. 1835. Alciphron. A Poem. 1839. [Also issued with The Epicurean. 1839.] B. Prose Works A Candid Appeal to Public Confidence, or Considerations on the actual and imaginary dangers of the present Crisis. 1803. A Letter to the Roman Catholics of Dublin. Dublin, 1810. The World at Westminster. A Periodical Publication. By Thomas Brown, the younger. 2 vols. 1816. Memoirs of Captain Rock, with some account of his ancestors. 1824. 4th edn. 1824. Memoirs of the Life of the Rt Hon. R. B. Sheridan. 1825. 3rd edn. 2 vols. 1825. The Epicurean. A Tale. 1827. Illustrated by Turner, J. M. W. 1839. Ed. Hannaford, J. 1900. Transl. into French by Renouard, A. A., Paris, 1827, and Butat, H.,412 B/iiiography [CH. Paris, 1865; into German, Innsbruck, 1828; into Italian, Milan, 1836; into Dutch, Deventer, 1829; into Spanish, Barcelona, 1832. Reviewed by Peacock, T. L., in Westminster Review, 1827. Letters and Journals of Lord Byron, with notices of his life. 2 vols. 1830. Transl. into French and German. The Life and Death of Lord Edward Fitzgerald. 2 vols. 1831. Ed. MacDermott, M. 1897. The Works of Lord Byron, with his Letters and Journals, and his Life by Thomas Moore. 17 vols. 1832-5. See, also, ante, chap. II, bibliography. Travels of an Irish Gentleman in search of a Religion. 2 vols. 1833. With a biographical and literary introduction by Burke, J. 1853. The Works of R. B. Sheridan, collected by Thomas Moore. 1833. History of Ireland from the earliest Kings of that realm down to the last Chief. 4 vols. (Lardner's Cabinet Cyclopedia.) 1835-46. Transl. into German by Ackers, C., 2 vols., Baden, 1846. Prose and Verse; humorous, satirical, and sentimental. With suppressed passages from the Memoirs of Lord Byron. All hitherto inedited and uncollected. With notes and introduction by Shepherd, R. H. 1878. C. Letters and Journals Memoirs, Journals, and Correspondence of Thomas Moore. Ed. by the Rt Hon. Lord John Russell. 8 vols. 1853-6. Correspondence between the Rt Hon. J. W. Croker and the Rt Hon. Lord John Russell on some passages of Moore's Diary. 1854. Notes from the Letters of Thomas Moore to his Music Publisher, James Power. With an introductory letter from T. Crofton Croker, Esq. New York, [1854]. 'Thomas Moore' anecdotes. Ed., with notes, by Harrison, W. With introduction by Garnett, R. 1899. D. Biography and Criticism Baldensperger, F. Thomas Moore et Alfred de Vigny. Modern Language Review. Vol. i. Cambridge, 1906. Burke, James. The Life of Thomas Moore. 1852. Dawson. Byron und Moore. Leipzig, 1902. Gilfillan, G. Thomas Moore. Galleries of literary portraits. Vol. I. 1856. Gunning, J. P. Moore: Poet and Patriot. Dublin, 1900. Gwynn, S. Thomas Moore. (English Men of Letters series.) 1905. Hazlitt, W. The Plain Speaker. Essay xxxii. Works. Edd. Waller, A. R. and Glover, A. Vol. vI. 1903. Kiihnel. Thomas Moore's Irish Melodies. Gumbinnen, 1876. Montgomery, H. R. Thomas Moore: his life, writings, and contemporaries. 1860. Pierson. The Epic Poems of Walter Scott compared with the like poetry of Thomas Moore. Berlin, 1863. Rinck. A Comparison of the Lyrical Poems of Thomas Moore and Lord Byron. Cologne, 1871. Saintsbury, G. Moore. Essays in English Literature, 1780-1860. 1890. Schemmel. Thomas Moore und seine Rhymes on the Road. Meerane, 1892._ 1

T 7-. 0 _ _ n

14- * 3 vj L-esser roets, 1790- I037 4I3 Schorkopf. Uber Thomas Moore's Leben und Schriften. Ilfeld, 1862. Symington, A. J. Thomas Moore, his life and works. 1880. Thiergen. Byron und Moore's Orientalische Gedichte. Leipzig, 1880. Thomas, A. B. Moore en France. Contribution l'histoire de la fortune de ses oeuvres dans la litterature francaise, 1819-30. Paris, 1911. Vallat, G. Etude sur la vie et les oeuvres de Thomas Moore. Paris, 1886. T-homas Moore et son ceuvre immortelle. Tours, 1895. Zemlin, J. Thomas Moore's Dichtungen. Berlin, 1894. IV. OTHER POETS Sarah Adams (born Flower) (1805-1848) Vivia Perpetua. A Dramatic Poem. 1841. Robert Anderson (1770-1833) Poetical Works. 2 vols. Carlisle, 1820. Ballads in the Cumbrian dialect. Carlisle, 1805. Wigton, 1808. Edwin Atherstone Poetical Works. Ed. Atherstone, M. E. 1888. The Last days of Herculaneum, etc. 1821. The Fall of Nineveh. 1828, 1847, 1868. The Handwriting on the Wall. 3 vols. 1858. Joanna Baillie See ante, vol. xi, chaps. x and xnI, bibliography. John Codrington Bampfylde See ante, vol. x, chap. vni, bibliography. Richard Harris Barham The Ingoldsby Legends. 1840. Second and Third Series. 1847. (First appeared in Bentley's Miscellany and The New Monthly Magazine.) Ed. Bond, Mrs E. A. 3 vols. 1894. The Life and Letters of Richard Harris Barham. By his Son. 2 vols. 1870. 3rd edn. 1880. Saintsbury, G. Essays in English Literature, 1780-1860. Second series. 1895. William Barnes Select Poems. Ed. Hardy, T. 1908. Poems of rural life in the Dorset dialect. 1844. Hwomely Rhymes: a second collection of poems of rural life in the Dorset dialect. 1859. Third collection. 1862. Collected edns. 1879, 1893. A Philological Grammar. 1854. A Grammar and Glossary of the Dorset dialect. 1863. Baxter, L. Life of William Barnes. 1887. Bernard Barton Poems and Letters of Bernard Barton, selected by Lucy Barton. With a biographical notice by Edward FitzGerald. 1849. Metrical Effusions. 1812. The Convict's Appeal. 1818. Poems by an Amateur. 1818. Poems. 1820. 4th edn. 1825.4 4 I Bibliography [CH. The Widow's Tale, and other Poems. 1827. Household Verses. 1845. Lucas, E. V. Bernard Barton and his friends. 1893. Thomas Haynes Bayly Songs, Ballads, and other Poems. Ed. by his Widow. With a memoir of the author. 2 vols. 1844. The Aylmers. 3 vols. 1827. Perfection. A Farce. 1836. Weeds of Witchery. 1837. She wore a wreath of roses. [1840?.] I'd be a butterfly. [1840?.] Thomas Lovell Beddoes Poems. With a memoir by Kelsall, T. F. 2 vols. 1851. Poetical Works. Ed. Gosse, E. 2 vols. 1890. Poems. Ed. Colles, R. 1907. Letters. Ed. Gosse, E. 1894. The Improvisatore, with other Poems. Oxford, 1821. The Bride's Tragedy. 1822. Death's Jest Book, or The Fool's Tragedy. 1850. Henry Glassford Bell (1803-1874) Poems. Edinburgh, 1824. My Old Portfolio. 1832. Romances and other Poems. 1866. Alexander Bethune (1804-1843) Tales and Sketches of the Scottish Peasantry. Edinburgh, 1838. The Scottish Peasant's Fireside. Edinburgh, 1843. Samuel Laman Blanchard Poetical Works. Ed. with a memoir, by Jerrold, B. 1876. Sketch from Life. (Essays.) Ed., with a memoir, by Bulwer-Lytton, Sir E. 3 vols. 1846. Lyric Offerings. 1828. Corporation Characters. 1855. Robert Bloomfield Remains in poetry and prose. Ed. Weston, J. 2 vols. 1824. The Farmer's Boy. 1800. Rural Tales, Ballads, and Songs. 1802. Wild Flowers. 1806. Miscellaneous Poems. 1806. The Banks of the Wye. 1811. May Day with the Muses. 1822. Caroline Anne Bowles (Mrs Southey) Poetical Works. 1867. Ellen Fitzarthur. A metrical Tale. 1820. The Widow's Tale. 1822. Solitary Hours. 1826.'l

T - _ _

vj L esser roets, 1790 - 37 415 Chapters on Church-yards. 1829. The Birthday. 1836. The Correspondence of Robert Southey with Caroline Bowles. Ed. Dowden, E. Dublin, 1881. Henry Francis Cary Sonnets and Odes. 1788. The Inferno of Dante Alighieri. With translation, etc., by H. F. Cary. 1805. The Vision; or Hell, Purgatory, and Paradise of Dante Alighieri. 3 vols. 1814. 2nd edn. 1819. The early French Poets. A series of notices and translations. 1846. Memoir of the Rev. H. F. Cary by his Son, Henry Cary. 2 vols. 1847. Toynbee, P. The Centenary of the completion of Cary's Dante. Modern Lang. Review. Vol. vii. Cambridge, 1912. John Castillo (1792-1845) The Bard of the Dales, or Poems... partly in the Yorkshire dialect. 1850. Poems in the North Yorkshire dialect. Ed. Tweddell, G. M3. 1878. John Clare Poems. Ed. Symons, A. 1908. Poems descriptive of rural life and scenery. 1820. The Village Minstrel, and other Poems. 2 vols. 1821. The Shepherd's Calendar. 1827. The Rural Muse. 1835. Cherry, J. L. Life and Remains of John Clare. 1873. Martin, F. Life of John Clare. 1865. Hartley Coleridge Poems, with a memoir of his life by Coleridge, D. 2 vols. 1851. Essays and Marginalia. Ed. Coleridge, D. 2vols. 1851. Poems. Ed. Bailey-Kempling, W. Ulverston, 1903. Poems. Leeds, 1833. Biographia Borealis, or Lives of Northern Worthies. 1833. New edn. by Coleridge, D. 3 vols. 1852. The Dramatic Works of Massinger and Ford. With introductions by Coleridge, Hartley. 1840. See, also, ante, vol. xi, chap. vi, bibliography. Sara Coleridge Phantasmion. 1837. Ed. Coleridge, Lord. 1874. Memoir and Letters of Sara Coleridge, ed. by her daughter. 2 vols. 1873. See, also, ante, vol. xi, chap. vi, bibliography. Josiah Conder (1789-1855) The Associate Minstrels. 1810. The Star in the East, and other Poems. 1824. The Modern Traveller. 30 vols. 1825-9. Hymns of Prayer and Praise. Ed. Conder, E. R. 1856. Conder, E. R. Josiah Conder. 1857.416

Bibliography

[CH.

George Croly (1780-1860) Paris in 1815. 1817. The Angel of the World, etc. 1820. May Fair. 1827. Salathiel. 1829. New edn. New York, 1901. Poetical Works. 2 vols. 1830. The Book of Job. With memoir of George Croly by Croly, F. W. 1863. Herring, R. Personal Recollections of George Croly. 1861. William Crowe (1745-1829) Lewesdon Hill. Oxford, 1788, 1804,1827. George Darley Selections from the Poems of George Darley. Ed. Streatfeild, R. A. 1904. Complete Poetical Works. Ed. Colles, R. 1908. The Errors of Ecstacie. 1822. The Labours of Idleness. 1826. Sylvia, or the May Queen. 1827. Ed. Ingram, J. H. 1892. Nepenthe. A Poem. [1836.] Ed. Streatfeild, R. A. 1897. Thomas a Becket. 1840. Ethelstan. 1841. Sir Aubrey De Vere (1788-1846) Julian the Apostate. A dramatic poem. 1822. The Duke of Mercia: An historical drama, and other Poems. 1823. A Song of Faith, Devout Exercises, and Sonnets. 1842. Mary Tudor: An historical drama. 1847, 1884. Charlotte Elliott (1789-1871) The Invalid's Hymn Book. 1834. Hours of Sorrow. 1840. Selections from Poems, with memoir by Babington, Mrs. [1873.] Leaves from unpublished Journals, Correspondence and Note-books. [1874.] Ebenezer Elliott Works, ed. by his son Elliott, E. 2 vols. 1876. The Village Patriarch. 1829. Corn-Law Rhymes. 1831. Love. A Poem. 1831. The Splendid Village; Corn-Law Rhymes; and other Poems. 3 vols. 1833-5. More Verse and Prose by the Corn-Law Rhymer. 2 vols. 1850. 'Searle, J.' Memoirs of Ebenezer Elliott. 1850. Watkins, J. Life, Poetry, and Letters of Ebenezer Elliott. 1850. Catherine Maria Fanshawe (1765-1834) Literary Remains. With notes by Harness, W. 1876. William Gilbert (1760?-1825?) The Hurricane. A Theosophical and Western Eclogue. Bristol, 1796. William Glen (1789-1826) Poetical Remains. With memoir. 1874. Poems, chiefly lyrical. 1815.v] Lesser Poets, 1790- 1837 417 Sir Robert Grant (1779-1838) Sacred Poems. Ed. Charles, Lord Glenelg. 1839. Other edns: 1844,1868. William Hall (1748-1825) A Sketch of Local History, being a chain of incidents relating to the state of the Fens. 3 pts. Lynn, 1812-18. Sketches of obscure poets,with specimens of their writings. 1833. Janet Hamilton (1795-1873) Poems and Prose Works, collected by her Son. Glasgow, 1880, 1885. Poems and Essays. 1863. Poems and Sketches. 1865. Robert Stephen Hawker Poetical Works. Ed. Godwin, J. G. 1879. Poetical Works. Ed. Wallis, A. 1899. Pompeii. Oxford, 1827. Records of the Western Shore. Oxford, 1832-6. The Quest of the Sangraal. Chant the First. Exeter, 1864. Cornish Ballads, and other Poems. 1869. Ed. Byles, C. E. 1904. Footprints of Former Men in Far Cornwall. 1870. Ed. Byles, C. E. 1903. Baring-Gould, S. Memoir of R. S. Hawker. 1875. Byles, C. E. Life and Letters of R. S. Hawker. 1905. Lee, F. G. Memorials of the late R. S. Hawker. 1876. Reginald Heber Poetical Works. 1841. Palestine. 1807. Poems and Translations. 1812. Hymns. 1827. 10th edn. 1834. Life of Reginald Heber, by his Widow. 2 vols. 1830. Smith, G. Bishop Heber. 1895. Felicia Dorothea Hemans (born Browne) Collected Works. Ed. with memoir by her Sister. 7 vols. 1839. Poems. Liverpool, 1808. The Domestic Affections, and other Poems. 1812. Modern Greece. 1817. The Forest Sanctuary. 1826. 2nd edn. 1829. Records of Women, and other Poems. 1828. Chorley, H. F. Memorials of Mrs Hemans. 2 vols. 1836. John Abraham Heraud Tottenham. 1820. The Descent into Hell. 2nd edn. 1835. The Judgment of the Flood. 1834. Videna, or the Mother's Tragedy. 1854. The War of Ideas. 1871. Heraud, E. Memoirs of J. A. Heraud. 1898.

E. L. XII.

27418 Bibtiography [CH. Thomas Hood Poems. 2 vols. 1846. Poems of Wit and Humour. 1847. 7th edn. 1856. Works. Ed. with notes by his Son. 7 vols. 1862-3. Works. Ed. with notes by his Son and Daughter. 10 vols. 1869-73. Poetical Works. Ed. Rossetti, W. M. 1880. Works. 11 vols. 1882-4. Poems. Ed. Ainger, A. 2 vols. 1897. Complete Poetical Works. Ed. Jerrold, W. Oxford, 1906. Odes and Addresses to Great People. [Written in collaboration with Reynolds, J. H.] 1825. Whims and Oddities in prose and verse. 2 series. 2 vols. 1826-7. The Plea of the Midsummer Fairies, and other Poems. 1827. National Tales. 2 vols. 1827. Lamia. Written about 1827. Ptd in Jerdan, W. Autobiography. Vol. I. 1852. The Epping Hunt. 1829. The Gem. Ed. Hood, T. 1829. The Comic Annual. 1830-9,1842. Tylney Hall. A Novel. 3 vols. 1834. Hood's Own, or Laughter from Year to Year. 1839. A further collection, with preface by his son. 1861. Up the Rhine. 1840. Whimsicalities. A periodical gathering. 2 vols. 1844. Hood's Magazine and Comic Miscellany. 10 vols. 1844-8. Ashton, J. The true story of Eugene Aram. Eighteenth Century Waifs. 1887. Broderip, Mrs F. F. Memorials of Hood, by his Daughter. 2 vols. 1860. Elliott, A. Hood in Scotland. Dundee, 1885. Gilfillan, G. Thomas Hood. Galleries of literary portraits. Vol. i. 1856. Jerrold, W. Thomas Hood, his life and times. 1907. Oswald, E. Thomas Hood und die soziale Tendenzdichtung seiner Zeit. Wiener Beitrage zur engl. Philologie. Vol. xIx. Vienna, 1904. Saintsbury, G. Thomas Hood. Essays in English Literature, 1780-1860. 2nd series. 1895. Richard Henry (or Hengist) Horne Cosmo de' Medici. 1837. The Death of Marlowe. 1837. Orion. 1843. 6th edn. 1843. Gregory vii. A Tragedy. 1840. A New Spirit of the Age. 2 vols. 1844. Ed. Jerrold, W. 1907. Ballad Romances. 1846. The Poor Artist. 1850. Australian Facts and Prospects. 1859. Laura Dibalzo. 1880. Nicoll, W. R. and Wise, T. J. Literary Anecdotes of the Nineteenth Century. Vol. I. 1895. George Huddesford (1749-1809) Salmagundi. 1791. Collected Poems. 2 vols. 1801. James Hyslop (1798-1827) Poems. Ed., with a sketch of his life, by Mearns, P. 1887.-1

T 7-,

vJ Lesser roets, 1790- I 37 4 19 John Kennedy (1789-1833) Fancy's Tour with the Genius of Cruelty, and other Poems. 1826. Geordie Chalmers. 1830. Rann Kennedy (1772-1851) Britain's Genius. A Mask. To which is added The Reign of Youth. 1840. See, also, Kennedy, B. I., Between Whiles, 2nd edn, 1882, and Kennedy, C. R., Poems, original and translated, new edn, 1857. John Kenyon (1784-1856) A Rhymed Plea for Tolerance. 1833. Poems. 1838. A Day at Tivoli. 1849. Herbert Knowles (1798-1877) The Three Tabernacles (Stanzas in Richmond Churchyard). [ab. 1817.] Rptd in Carlisle, N., Endowed Grammar Schools, 1818. Letitia Elizabeth Landon ('L. E. L.' Mrs Maclean) Collected Poems. 2 vols. 1850, 1873. The Improvisatrice. 1824. 6th edn. 1825. Romance and Reality. 1831. Traits and Trials of Early Life. 1836. Ethel Churchill. 1837. Blanchard, L. Life and Remains of L. E. L. 2 vols. 1841. Charles Valentine Le Grice (1773-1858) Analysis of Paley's Principles. 1794. An Imitation of Horace's First Epistle. Penzance, 1824. John Leyden See ante, vol. xi, chap. x, bibliography. Charles Lloyd (1775-1839) Poems. 1795. Isabel. A Tale. 2 vols. 1820. Desultory Thoughts in London. 1821. Poetical Essays on the Character of Pope. 1821. See, also, ante, vol. xi, chap. vi, bibliography, sect. c. Henry Luttrell (1765-1851) Advice to Julia. A Letter in Rhyme. 1820. 3rd edn. 1822. Crockford House. 1827. Henry Francis Lyte (1793-1847) Tales in Verse. 1826. Poems chiefly religions. 1833. The Spirit of the Psalms. 1834. Remains, with memoir by his daughter. 1850. Miscellaneous Poems. 1868. 27-2420

Bibliography

[CH.

Richard Mant (1776-1848) Ancient Hymns from the Roman Breviary. To which are added, Original Hymns. 1837. Mant, W. B. Memoir of Richard Mant. 1857. John Mayne (1759-1836) English, Scots, and Irishmen. 1803. Glasgow. A Poem. 1803. The Siller Gun. A Poem. 1808. John Herman Merivale (1779-1844) Translations, chiefly from the Greek Anthology. 1806. Poems, original and translated. 2 vols. 1838. John Miitford (1781-1859) Agnes, the Indian Captive, 1811. Miscellaneous Poems. 1858. Houston, M. Sylvanus Redivivus (the Rev. John Mitford). 1889. James Montgomery Poetical Works. 4 vols. 1841,1850. The Ocean. 1805. The Wanderer of Switzerland. 1806. The West Indies. 1810. The World before the Flood. 1813. Greenland. 1819. The Pelican Island. 1826. Holland, J. and Everett, J. Life of James Montgomery. 7 vols. 1854-6. Robert Montgomery Poetical Works. 6 vols. 1840. The Omnipresence of the Deity. 1828. 28th edn. 1855. Satan, or Intellect without God. 1830. Reviewed by Macaulay in the Edinburgh Review, April 1830. The Messiah. 1832. Dugald Moore (1805-1841) The African. 1829. The Bridal Night. 1831. The Bard of the North. 1833. Charles Morris (1745-1838) Lyra Urbanica. 2 vols. 1840. Songs. 13th edn. 1793. John Moultrie (1799-1874) Collected Works. 2 vols. 1876. My Brother's Grave. 1820. Godiva. 1820. The Dream of Life, etc. 1843.v]

Lesser Poets, I790-1837

42I

Edward Moxon (1801-1858) The Prospect, and other Poems. 1826. Christmas. A Poem. 1829. Sonnets. 1830-5, 1871. John Nicholson (1790-1843) Poems. Ed., with memoir, by James, J. 1844. Poetical Works. Ed. Hird, W. 0. 1876. Airedale in Ancient Times. 1825. The Airedale Poet's Walk through Knaresborough. 1826. William Nicholson (1782?-1849) Tales in Verse, and Miscellaneous Poems. 1814. George Outram (1805-1856) Lyrics, legal and miscellaneous. Privately ptd. Rptd by Bell, H. G., with biographical sketch. 1874. New edn by Stoddart, J. H. 1887. Robert Pollok The Course of Time. 2 vols. Edinburgh, 1827. 25th edn. 1867. Tales of the Covenanters. 1833. Pollok, D. Life of Robert Pollok, by his Brother. 1843. Masson, R. Pollok and Aytoun. (Famous Scots series.) 1899. Winthrop Mackworth Praed Poems. Ed. Coleridge, D. 2 vols. 1864. Selections. Ed. Young, Sir G. 1866. Prose Essays. Ed. Young, Sir G. 1887. Political and Occasional Poems. Ed. Young, Sir G. 1888. Select Poems. Ed. Godley, A. D. 1909. Kranpa, M. W. M. Praed, sein Leben und seine Werke. Wiener Beitrige. Vol. xxxII. Vienna, 1910. Saintsbury, G. Praed. Essays in English Literature, 1780-1860. 1890. Thomas Pringle (1789-1834) Poetical Works. Ed. Ritchie, L. 1839. Afar in the Desert, and other South African Poems. Ed. Noble, J. 1881. Ephemerides. 1828. African Sketches. 1834. Conder, J. Biographical Sketch of T. Pringle. 1835. Bryan Waller Procter (Barry Cornwall) Dramatic Scenes, and other Poems. 1819. Mirandola. A Tragedy. 1821. Poetical Works. 3 vols. 1822. English Songs. 1832. 3rd edn. 1851. Life of Edmund Kean. 1835. Charles Lamb: A memoir. 1866. Autobiographical Fragment. Ed. Patmore, C. 1877. Becker, F. B. W. Procter. Wiener Beitrage. Vol. xxxvI. Vienna, 1911.4.22

Bibliography

[CH.

Henry James Pye Poems on various subjects. 2 vols. 1787. Naucratia, or Naval Dominion. 1798 Adelaide. A tragedy. 1800. Alfred. An epic poem. 1801. Comments on the commentators on Shakespeare. 1807. Austin, W. S. and Ralph, J. Lives of the Laureates. 1853. Edward Quillinan (1791-1851) Poems. With memoir by Johnston, W. 1853. The Lusiad of Camoens translated (Books I-v). Ed. Adamson, J. 1853. John Hamilton Reynolds (1796-1852) The Eden of Imagination. 1814. Sofie. An Eastern Tale. 1814. The Naiad, etc. 1816. William Stewart Rose (1775-1843) Amadis de Gaule translated with notes by W. S. Rose. 1803. The Orlando Innamorato of Boiardo translated by W. S. Rose. 1823. Anna Seward (1747-1809) Poetical Works. Ed. Scott, W. 3 vols. 1810. Letters. 6 vols. 1811. Lucas, E. V. A Swan and her Friends. 1907. Horatio (Horace) Smith Poetical Works. 2 vols. 1846. Rejected Addresses, or the new Theatrum Poetarum. [By James and Horace Smith.] 1812. 18th edn. 1833. Ed. Fitzgerald, P. 1890. Ed. Godley, A.D. 1904. Horace in London. By the Authors of rejected Addresses. 1813. Gaieties and Gravities. 3 vols. 1825. Brambletye House, or Cavaliers and Roundheads. 1826. Zillah. A Tale of the Holy City. 1828. Beavan, A. H. James and Horace Smith. 1899. James Smith. See, also, Horace Smith (supra) Memoirs, Letters, and Comic Miscellanies. Ed. by his Brother, Smith, Horace. 2 vols. 1840. William Sotheby Poems. 1790. The Oberon of Wieland translated. 1798. The Georgics of Virgil translated. 1800. Saul. A Poem, 1807. Poems. 1825. Italy and other Poems. 1828. The Iliad of Homer translated. 1831. The Iliad and Odyssey of Homer translated. 1834. William Robert Spencer The Leonora of Biirger translated. 1796. Urania. A Comedy. 1802. The Year of Sorrow. 1804. Poems. 1811. With biographical memoir. 1835._ -1

T 7_ r

vJ Lesser roets, I790  1 37 423 Robert Story (1795-1860) Poetical Works. 1857. Lyrical and other minor Poems. With life by James, J. 1861. The Magic Fountain. 1829. The Outlaw. 1839. Guthrum the Dane. 1852. John Struthers (1776-1853) Poems. Glasgow, 1801. Anticipation. Glasgow, 1803. The Poor Man's Sabbath. Glasgow, 1804. Dychmont. Glasgow, 1836. Poetical Works, with autobiography. 2 vols. Glasgow, 1850. Charles Swain (1801-1874) The Mind, and other Poems. 1832. English Melodies. 1849. Songs and Ballads. 1867. Sir Henry Taylor Works. 5 vols. 1877-8. New edn. 1883. Isaac Comnenus. 1827. Philip van Artevelde. 1834. 6th edn. 1852. The Statesman. 1836. Edwin the Fair. 1842. The Eve of the Conquest, and other Poems. 1847. Notes from Life, in six essays. 1847. Notes from Books, in four essays. 1849. The Virgin Widow. 1850. St Clement's Eve. 1862. Autobiography, 1800-1875. 2 vols. 1885. Correspondence. Ed. Dowden, E. 1888. Mrs Mary Tighe (1772-1810) Psyche, or the Legend of Love. 1805. 4th edn. 1812. Thomas Wade Tasso and The Sisters. 1825. Woman's Love, or the Triumph of Patience. 1829. The Jew of Arragon. A Tragedy. 1830. Mundi et Cordis, de rebus sempiternis et temporariis, carmina. 1835. Nicoll, W. R. and Wise, T. J. Literary Anecdotes of the Nineteenth Century. Yol. I. 1895. Alaric Alexander Watts (1797-1864) Poetical Sketches. 1823. 4th edn. 1828. The Poetical Album, and register of modern fugitive poetry. 2 vols. 1828-9. Scenes of Life and Shades of Character. 2 vols. 1831. Lyrics of the Heart. 1851.424 Bibliography [CH. Charles Jeremiah Wells Stories after Nature. 1822. Ed. Linton, W. J. 1891. Joseph and his Brethren. A dramatic poem. 1824. With introduction by Swinburne, A. C. 1876. New edn. Oxford, 1908. Nicoll, W. R. and Wise, T. J. Literary Anecdotes of the Nineteenth Century. Vol. i. 1895. Henry Kirhe White The Remains of Henry Kirke White. With an account of his life, by Southey, R. 3 vols. 1807-22. Poetical Works. With memoir. (Aldine edn.) 1830. Poems, Letters and Prose Fragments. Ed. Drinkwater, J. 1908. Clifton Grove, with other Poems. 1803. Charles Whitehead The Solitary. A Poem. 1831. The Autobiography of Jack Ketch. 1834. Lives and Exploits of English Highwaymen. 2 vols. 1834. The Cavalier. 1836. Richard Savage. 3 vols. 1842. Rptd 1896, 1903. The Earl of Essex. 3 vols. 1843. The Solitary, and other Poems. 1849. Bell, H. T. Mackenzie. A Forgotten Genius. 1884. Isaac Williams (1802-1865) Lyra Apostolica. 1836. Hymns. 1839. The Altar, or Meditations in verse on the great Christian Sacrifice. 1847. Autobiography. Ed. Prevost, Sir G. 1892. William Wilson (1801-1860) Poems. Ed. Lossing, B. J. Poughkeepsie, 1869. 2nd edn. 1875. Charles Wolfe Remains of the Rev. Charles Wolfe. Ed. Russell, J. A. 2 vols. Dublin, 1825. 4th edn. 1829. James Woodhouse (1735-1820) Life and Works. Ed. Woodhouse, R. J. 2 vols. 1896. Poems on sundry occasions. 1764. Poems on several occasions. 1788. Norbury Park. 1803 John Wright (1805-1843?) Whole Poetical Works. 1843. The Retrospect. 1825. John Younger (1785-1860) Thoughts as they rise. Glasgow, 1834. River Angling for Salmon and Trout. Kelso,"1860. Autobiography of John Younger. Kelso, 1881. A. T. B.VI]

Reviews and Mafngazines

425

CHAPTER VI REVIEWS AND MAGAZINES IN THE EARLY YEARS OF THE NINETEENTH CENTURY BLACKWOOD'S EDINBURGH MAGAZINE Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine. Edinburgh, 1817, etc. In progress. This work was begun under the title The Edinburgh Monthly Magazine. Particular Contributors and Contributions Eagles, J. Essays contributed to Blackwood's Magazine. 1857. - The Sketcher. 1856. Hogg, James (the Ettrick Shepherd). See, ante, bibliography to vol. xi, chap. x. Lockhart, J. G. See under The Quarterly Review. Maginn, William. Magazine Miscellanies. 1841. - iscellaneous Writings.... Ed. Shelton Mackenzie. 5 vols. New York, 1855-7. [See, also, under Fraser's Magazine.] Neaves, Charles (1800-1876). Songs and Verses, Social and Scientific. Edinburgh, 1868. Sterling, J. Essays and Tales. Ed. Hare, J. C. 2 vols. 1848. Translation from an Ancient Chaldee Manuscript, etc. [Proof of the satire by Hogg, James, Lockhart, J. G., and Wilson, John, which appeared in Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine for October 1817.] [1817.] [B.M. copy only.] Wilson, John (pseud. Christopher North). The Recreations of Christopher North. 3 vols. Edinburgh, 1842. Essays, critical and imaginative. 4 vols. 1866. - Works.... Ed.... Professor Ferrier. 12 vols. 1855-8. Gordon, Mary. Christopher North: a memoir. 1862. Le Fevre Deumier, J. C6elbrit6s Anglaises. Paris, 1895. Saintsbury, G. Essays in English Literature, 1780-1860. 1890. Douglas, Sir G. P. S. The Blackwood Group. [1897.] Famous Scots Series. Oliphant, M. 0. Annals of a Publishing House. William Blackwood and his sons: their magazine and friends. 3 vols. 1897, 1898. Porter, Mary. Annals of a Publishing House: John Blackwood. [A continuation of the above.] Edinburgh, 1898. Tales from Blackwood. 12 vols. Edinburgh, [1858-61]. New series. 12 vols. Edinburgh, [1878-80]. Third series. 6 vols. [1889, 1890.] Travel, Adventure and Sport. From Blackwood's Magazine. 6 vols. [1889-91.] CHAMBERS'S JOURNAL Chambers's Edinburgh Journal. Conducted by Chambers, W. and R. 12 vols. [1832]-44. New series. 20 vols. Edinburgh, 1844-54. [Continued as:] Chambers's Journal of Popular Literature, Science and Arts. Conducted by Chambers, W. and R. 1854, etc. In progress. Chambers, R. Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation. 1844. Essays familiar and humorous. (Rptd from Chambers's Journal.) [1866.] - W. Memoir of Robert Chambers with autobiographic reminiscences of William Chambers. 1872.426 Bibliography [CH. THE CORNHILL MAGAZINE The Cornhill Magazine. [Ed. from the beginning to April 1862 by Thackeray, W. M.; and, subsequently, by Stephen, Sir Leslie; Payn, James; Strachey, J. St Leo; and Smith, Reginald, J.] 1860, etc. In progress. THE DUBLIN REVIEW The Dublin Review. Vols. I-LII. 1836-63. New series. Vols. I-XXXI. 1863-78. Third series. (Vols. cxxxvIII, etc., ed. Ward, Wilfred.) 1879, etc. In progress. [For a general list of articles contained in Vols. ICXVIII, 1836-96, see vol. cxvIII, pp. 467-502. 1896.] THE EDINBURGH REVIEW The Edinburgh Review.... [To be published every six months.] Containing an account of all the books and pamphlets that have been published in Scotland from the first of January to the first of July 1755 (from July 1755 to Jan. 1756). To each number will be added an appendix, giving an account of the books published in England and other countries that are most worthy of notice. [By Robertson, W.; Smith, Adam; Wedderburn, A., Rosslyn, Earl of; Blair, Hugh, and others.] Nos. 1 and 2. Edinburgh, 1755-[6]. 2nd edn, with a preface and explanatory notes. 1818. The Edinburgh Review, or Critical Journal. [No. 1 ed. by Smith, Sydney. From 1803 to 1829 ed. by Jeffrey, Francis (afterwards Lord Jeffrey), and, subsequently, by Napier, M., Empson, W., Lewis, Sir G. C., Bart., Reeve, H., Elliot, the Hon. A. R. D. and Cox, Harold.] Edinburgh, 1803 [1802], etc. In progress.' Particular Contributors Allen, John. Memoirs of Lord Bolingbroke. By Cooke, G. W. [A criticism by A., J., extracted from The Edinburgh Review.] [1835.] Barrow, Sir J. An autobiographical Memoir of Sir J. B.,... from early life to advanced age. 1847. Brougham, Henry [Lord Brougham and Vaux]. Thoughts suggested by Lord Lauderdale's observations upon The Edinburgh Review. 1805. - Critique [by Lord B.] from The Edinburgh Review on Lord Byron's poems, etc. 1820. -- Contributions to The Edinburgh Review. 3 vols. 1856. - ife and Times written by himself. 3 vols. Edinburgh, 1871. - Works. 11 vols. 1855-61. Another edn. Edinburgh, 1872-3. Ellis, George. See, ante, vol. xI, chap. II, bibliography. Gladstone, William Ewart. For list of Gladstone's contributions to periodicals see bibliography in Notes and Queries, vols. II, III, 1893. Horner, Francis. Memoirs and Correspondence of F. H. Ed. Horner, L. 2 vols. 1843. Jeffrey (afterwards Lord) Francis. Contributions to The Edinburgh Review. 4 vols. 1844. Also 1853. Cockburn, H. Life of Lord Jeffrey, with a selection from his correspondence. 1852. Gates, L. E. Three Studies in Literature (Francis Jeffrey, etc.). 1899. Saintsbury, G. Essays in English Literature, 1780-1860 (Jeffrey and Sydney Smith). 1870. Macaulay, T. B. Critical and Historical Essays, contributed to The Edinburgh Review. 3 vols. 1843.VI]

Reviews and Magazines

427

Macaulay, T. B. Essays.... Rptd from The Edinburgh Review. Complete edn. 1887. Ed. with introduction, notes and index, by Montague, F. C. 3 vols. 1903. Oxford edn. 2 vols. 1913. Trevelyan, Sir G. 0. Life and Letters of Macaulay. 2 vols. 1876. Napier, Macvey. Lord Bacon and Sir W. Raleigh. [Two Essays.] Cambridge, 1853. - Selections from the Correspondence by... Macvey Napier, Esq. Edited by his son, Macvey Napier. 1879. Playfair, John. The Works of John Playfair. With a memoir of the author. [By Jeffrey, F. Ed. Playfair, J. C.] 4 vols. Edinburgh, 1822. Rogers, Henry. Essays, selected from contributions to The Edinburgh Review. 3 vols. 1850-5. Smith, Adam. Works. With an account of his life and writings by Stewart, Dugdale. 5 vols. 1812-11. See, also, ante, vol. x, chap. xiv, bibliography. Smith, Sydney. Sermons. 2nd edn with additions. 2 vols. 1801. [Another edn.] Two volumes of Sermons. 1809. -- Essays by S. S. Rptd from The Edinburgh Review. 1802-18. [1874.] Another edn. 1802-27. [1880.] -- Letters on the subject of the Catholics from Peter Plymley to his brother Abraham. 11th edn. 1808. -- Works. 4 vols. 1839-40. - The Letters of Peter Plymley. Essays and Speeches. 1852. With an introduction by Morley, H. 1886. Chevrillon, A. Sydney Smith et la renaissance des id6es lib6rales en Angleterre au xixe siecle. Paris, 1809. Holland, Lady. A Memoir of S. S. by his daughter, Lady Holland. 1855. Reid, S. J. The Life and Times of S. S. 4th edn. 1896. Saint Clair, O. Sydney Smith: a biographical sketch. 1913. Vaughan, R. Essays and Remains of... A. R. Vaughan. 2 vols. 1858. Stephen, Sir James. Essays in Ecclesiastical Biography. 2 vols. 1849. - The Rt Hon. Sir James Stephen,... Letters, with biographical notes by his daughter Caroline Emelia Stephen [ptd for private circulation only]. 1906. Constable, T. Archibald Constable and his literary correspondents. 3 vols. Edinburgh, 1873. Copinger, W. A. On the Authorship of the first hundred numbers of The Edinburgh Review. 1895. Copleston, Edward (1776-1849). Remains. 1854. Laughton, Sir J. K. Memoirs of the Life and Correspondence of Henry Reeve. 2 vols. 1898. Maitland, J. Observations by the Earl of Lauderdale, on the review [by Henry Brougham] of his Inquiry into the nature and origin of public wealth. 1804. Scipio, C. (pseud.). A Sketch of the politics of The Edinburgh Review, etc. 1807. Selections from The Edinburgh Review, comprising the best articles in that Journal from its commencement to the present time, and explanatory notes. Ed. Cross, M. 4 vols. 1833. FRASER'S MAGAZINE Fraser's Magazine for Town and Country. 80 vols. [1830-69.] New series. Vols. I-xxvi. 1870-2.428

Bibliography

[CH.

Maginn, William. A Gallery of Illustrious Literary Characters (1830-8) drawn by... D. Maclise,... accompanied by notices chiefly... by W. Maginn... Republished from Fraser's Magazine. Ed. Bates, W. [1873.] Mahony, F. S. (pseud. Father Pront). The Works of Father Prout.... Ed. with biographical introduction and notes by Kent, C. [1892.] THE GENTLEMAN'S MAGAZINE The Gentleman's Magazine; or, Monthly Intelligencer. Vols. I-v. Jan. 1731-Dec. 1735. The Gentleman's Magazine; and Historical Chronicle. Vols. VI-LXXVII. Jan. 1736-Dec. 1807. New series. Vols. LXXIII-CIII. Jan. 1808-Dec. 1833. By Sylvanus Urban. [Ed. from 1731 to 1754 by Cave, E.; from 1754 to 1766 by Henry, D. and Cave, R.; from 1766 to 1788 by Henry, D.; from 1788 to 1792 by Nichols, J. and Henry, D.; from 1792 to 1826 by Nichols, J.] 103 vols. 1731-1833. New series. Vols. I-XLV. 1834-56. New [third] series. Vols. I-xix. 1856-65. New [fourth] series. Vols. I-v. 1866-8. Entirely new series [ed. successively by Gowing, Hatton, Joseph and Knight, Joseph]. Vol. I, etc., 1868, etc. [Subsequently, this periodical has undergone various vicissitudes. From 1870 to 1905, Joseph Knight, of Notes and Queries, became associated with its production and contributed the Table Talk of Sylvanus Urban; and the latest series was inaugurated by A. H. Bullen, in February 1906, in which number he gave a history of the magazine. This last series was continued until September 1907. Since 1907, covers have been periodically printed in order to retain the copyright of the title.] THE LONDON MAGAZINE The London Magazine, or Gentleman's Monthly Intelligencer. April 1732 -Dec. 1779. 48 vols. 1732-79. After 1735, the title was altered to The London Magazine and Monthly Chronologer, under which it continued until 1746 inclusive, when the original title was again adopted. For the year 1765 (1767, 1780-June 1783). Vols. xxxIV, xxxVI, XLIX-LII. The London Magazine; enlarged and improved. For July 1783 [-June 1785]. 4 vols. 1765-85. THE MONTHLY MAGAZINE The Monthly Magazine and British Register. Feb. 1796-Jan. 1826. 60 vols. 1796-1825. [Continued as:] The Monthly Magazine: or, British Register of Literature, Sciences, and the Belles-Lettres. New series. Vols. I, II, IV, vIII-xvII. 1826-34. New series. 1 vol. 1835. [Continued as:] The Monthly Magazine of Politics, Literature, and the Belles-Lettres. Yols. xx-xxvI. 1835-8. [Continued as:] The Monthly Magazine. Ed. Heraud, J. A. (Hill, B. E., etc.). 9 vols. 1839-43. Blanchard, Samuel Laman. Sketches from Life... with a nmemoir of the author by Sir E. Bulwer Lytton. 3 vols. 1846. THE MONTHLY REPOSITORY The Monthly Repository of Theology and General Literature. [Ed. Aspland, R.] 21 vols. 1806-26. New series [ed. Fox, W. J. to June 1836; and Horne, R. H. July 1836 to June 1837]. 11 vols. 1827 37. Enlarged series. Ed. Hunt, Leigh. 1 vol. 1837. THE MONTHLY REVIEW The Monthly Review (or Literary Journal). A periodical work giving an account, with proper abstracts of, and extracts from, the new books, pamphlets, etc., as they come out. By several hands. 81 vols. [1749]-89.VI]

Reviews and Magazines

429

The Monthly Review, or Literary Journal, enlarged. 108 vols. 1790 -1825. The Monthly Review. New and improved series. Vols. i-vIII. 1826-8. Vols. ix-xv. 1828-30. New [fourth] and improved series. 45 vols. 1831-45. Taylor, William. A Memoir of the life and writings of... W. T.... containing his correspondence with... R. Southey. By Robberds, J. W. 1843. THE NEW MONTHLY MAGAZINE The New Monthly Magazine and Universal Register. 14 vols. 1814-20. [Continued as:] The New Monthly Magazine and Literary Journal. Ed. (vols. xv-xxx) Campbell, Thomas; (vols. XXXI-XLVIII) Bulwer, E. G. E. L., afterwards Lord Lytton. 1821-36. [Continued as:] The New Monthly Magazine and Humorist. Ed. (vols. XLIX-LXII) Hook, Theodore; (vols. LXIII-LXVIII) Hood, Thomas; (vols. LXXIII-CXLVII) Ainsworth, W. H.; (vols. CXLVIII, CXLIx) Ainsworth, W. F. 149 vols. 1837-71. [Continued as:] The New Monthly Magazine. New series. Ed. Ainsworth, W. F. 15 vols. 1872-9. New [third] series. Vols. I-v. 1879-81. [Continued as:] The New Monthly. New series. Vols. VI, II. 1882-4. THE NORTH BRITISH REVIEW The North British Review. 53 vols. Edinburgh, 1844-71. THE QUARTERLY REVIEW The Quarterly Review. [Edited, successively, by Gifford, W., Coleridge, Sir J. T., Lockhart, J. G., Elwin, W., Smith, Sir William, Prothero, R. E. and Prothero, G. W.] 1809, etc. In progress. Particular Contributors Croker, John Wilson. History of the Guillotine.... Revised from The Quarterly Review of Dec. 1844. 1853. - Essay on the early period of the French Revolution.... Rptd from The Quarterly Review, with additions and corrections. 1857. The Croker Papers. Correspondence and Diaries of J. W. C. Ed. Jennings, L. J. 3 vols. 1884. Elwin, Whitwell. Essays contributed to The Quarterly Review. 3 vols. [1843-85.] Consisting of cuttings, mounted. [B. M. copy only.] Some XVIII Century Men of Letters. Biographical essays by the Rev. Whitwell Elwin... with a memoir. Ed. by his son Elwin, Warwick. 2 vols. 1902. Gifford, Willia. See ante, vol. xi, chap. II, bibliography. Gladstone, W. E. See under The Edinburgh Review. Lockhart, J. G. Peter's Letters to his kinsfolk. 3 vols. 1819. Valerius. A Roman Story. 3 vols. Edinburgh, 1821. Some Passages in the Life of Mr Adam Blair. Edinburgh, 1822. Ancient Spanish Ballads historical and romantic.... Trans. by J. G. L. Edinburgh, 1823. Reginald Dalton. 3 vols. Edinburgh, 1823. - The History of Matthew Wald. Edinburgh, 1824. - ife of Robert Burns. Edinburgh, 1828. Ed. Ingram, J. H. 1890. The History of Napoleon Buonaparte. Edinburgh, 1829. - emoirs of the Life of Sir Walter Scott, Bart. 7 vols. Edinburgh, 1837-8. See, also, ante, chap. I, bibliography.430 Bibliography [CH. Lang, Andrew. The Life and Letters of John Gibson Lockhart.... From Abbotsford and Milton Lockhart MSS and other original sources. With fifteen illustrations. 2 vols. 1897 [1896]. Salisbury, Robert Arthur Talbot Gascoyne, Marquis of. Essays [rptd from The Quarterly Review, 1861-4].... Biographical. 2 vols. 1905. Scott, Sir Walter. See ante, chap. I, bibliography. Sharpe, Charles Kirkpatrick. Portraits by an Amateur. 1832. - A Ballad Book by C. K. Sharpe, M.DCCCXIII. Rptd with notes and Ballads from the unpublished MSS of C. K. Sharpe and Sir Walter Scott.... Edited... D. Laing. 1880. Letters from and to C. K. Sharpe. Ed. Allardyce, A. With memoir by Bedford, W. K. R. 2 vols. Edinburgh, 1888. Hazlitt, W. A Letter to W. Gifford [on his Conduct as Editor of The Quarterly Review]. 1819. Letter to J. G. Lockhart, Esq., in answer to a late article in The Quarterly Review [entitled The Revolutions of 1640 and 1830]. 1832. The Quarterly Review. Centenary Article. April and July 1909. Smiles, S. A Publisher and his Friends. Memoir and Correspondence of John Murray, with an account of the house, 1768-1843. 2 vols. 1891. THE RETROSPECTIVE REVIEW The Retrospective Review. 14 vols. 1820-6. Second series. Ed. Southern, H. and Nicolas, N. H. 2 vols. 1827-8. TAIT'S EDINBURGH MAGAZINE Tait's Edinburgh Magazine. 4 vols. Edinburgh, 1832-4. New series. Vols. I-XXVIII. Edinburgh, 1834-61. (In June 1834 Johnston's Edinburgh Magazine was incorporated with this work.) THE WESTMINSTER REVIEW The Westminster Review. [Ed., successively, by Bowring, Sir J. and Mill, J. S.] Vols. I-xxIV. 1824-36. The London Review, of which two vols. had been already published, was now united with The Westminster Review, the first vol. of the joint series being numbered vol. III and xxv. After vol. vII and xxIx,the double numeration was discontinued, and vols. I and II of The London Review were added, so as to count as the beginning of the new series: the volume immediately succeeding vol. vII and xxIx being numbered vol. XXXII of the united London and Westminster Reviews. [Continued as:] The London and Westminster Review. Vols. xxv-xxxIII. 1836-40. [Continued as:] The Westminster Review [ed. by Hickson, W. E.]. Vols. XXXIV-XLV. 1841-6. [Continued as:] The Westminster and Foreign Quarterly Review. Vols. XLVI-LVI. 1847-51. [Continued as:] The Westminster Review. New series. [Ed. by John Chapman.] Vols. I-LXXI [vols. LVII-CXXVII.] [New series.] Vol. cxxvIII, etc. 1887, etc. In progress. Bentham, Jeremy. Works. 11 vols. Edinburgh, 1843-38-43. Mill, James. Elements of Political Economy. 1821. The History of British India. 3 vols. 1817. - The Principles of Toleration. 1837. Among the contributors to several of the foregoing magazines may be mentioned Lord Acton, Harrison Ainsworth, Carlyle, De Quincey, Froude, Charles Kingsley, cardinal Newman and Thackeray. In addition to articlesVI]

Reviews and Magazines

431

and reviews, some wellknown works by these authors first appeared in these periodicals in serial form: Ainsworth's The Flitch of Bacon, Hilary St Ives and Boscobel in The New Monthly; Carlyle's Sartor Resartus and Kingsley's Hypatia in Fraser's; Thackeray's The Four Georges in The Cornhill, The Yellowplush Correspondence in Fraser's and The Bedford Row Conspiracy in The New Monthly Magazine. A complete list of contributions to magazines by Carlyle and Thackeray will be found in R. H. Shepherd's bibliographies of their works. For periodicals associated with, or edited by, Charles Dickens (Bentley's Miscellany, Household Words, All the Year Round, etc.), see the Dickens bibliography in volume xIII. GENERAL LITERATURE Bagehot, Walter. Literary Studies.... With a prefatory memoir. Ed. Hutton, R. H. 3 vols. 1895. Ellis, S. M. William Harrison Ainsworth and his friends. 2 vols. 1911. Gilfillan, George. A First Gallery of literary portraits. 1851. A Second Gallery of literary portraits. 1852. A Third Gallery of portraits. 1854. Paston, G. Side-lights on the Georgian period. 1902. Stephen, Sir Leslie. Hours in a Library. New edn, with additions. 4 vols. 1907. [See, particularly, vol. III, pp. 88-126.] G. A. BROWN. CHAPTER VII HAZLITT I. COLLECTED EDITION Works. Edd. Waller, A. R. and Glover, A. 12 volumes and index. 1902-6. [Includes everything save The Life of Napoleon.] II. SELECTIONS Several volumes have been published in Bohn's Library, in Everyman Library and in the Temple Classics. Dramatic Essays, with introduction and notes. Edd. Archer, W. and Lowe, R. W. 1895. Recent editions of a number of essays, with introduction, by Zeitlin, Jacob, Oxford, 1913; and Howe, W. D., Boston, U.S.A., 1913. III. SEPARATE WORKS An Essay on the Principles of Human Action... with Remarks on the System of Hartley and Helvetius. 1805. Free Thoughts on Public Affairs. 1806. An Abridgment of The Light of Nature Pursued, by Abraham Tucker. 1807. The Eloquence of the British Senate. Parliamentary Speeches and Notes. 1807. A Reply to the Essay on Population by the Rev. T. R. Malthus. 1807. A New and Improved Grammar of the English Tongue, etc. 1810.432 Bibliography [CH. Memoir of Thomas Holcroft, written by himself, etc. Continued by Hazlitt. 1816. The Round Table. [From The Examiner.] 2 vols. 1817. Characters of Shakspeare's Plays. 1817, 1818. 3rd edn. 1838. A View of the English Stage; or, a Series of Dramatic Criticisms. 1818, 1821. Lectures on the English Poets. 1818, 1819. A Letter to William Gifford, Esq. 1819. Lectures on the English Comic Writers. 1819. Political Essays, with Sketches of Public Characters. 1819, 1822. Lectures on the Dramatic Literature of the Age of Elizabeth. 1820. Table Talk; or, Original Essays on Man and Manners. 1821-2. 2nd edn. 1824. Liber Amoris; or, The New Pygmalion. 1823. Ed., with additional matter, by Le Gallienne, R. 1893. Characteristics, in the manner of Rochefoucauld's Maxims. 1823, 1837. Sketches of the Principal Picture Galleries in England, with a criticism on 'Marriage a' la Mode.' [In part from The London Magazine.] 1824. The Spirit of the Age; or, Contemporary Portraits. 1825. Select Poets of Great Britain, with critical notices. 1825. The Plain Speaker; or, Opinions on Books, Men, and Things. 2 vols. 1826. Notes of a Journey through France and Italy. [From The Morning Chronicle.] 1826. Boswell Redivivus. The New Monthly Magazine. 1826-7. The Life of Napoleon Buonaparte. Vols. I and ii. 1828. Vols. in and Iv. 1830. Conversations of James Northcote, Esq., R.A. 1830. Ed., with introductory essay on Hazlitt as art critic, by Gosse, E. 1894. Literary Remains of the late William Hazlitt, with a notice of his life by his Son; and Thoughts on his genius and writings by Bulwer, E. L. and Talfourd, T. N. 2 vols. 1836. Sketches and Essays, now first collected. 1839. Republished as Men and Manners. 1852. Criticisms on Art, etc. 1843, 1844. Winterslow: Essays and Characters written there. 1850. IV. BIOGRAPHY AND CRITICISM A. More Important Contemporary Criticism in Jlagazines Blackwood's Magazine. February 1818; March 1818; April 1818; June 1818; August 1818; July 1822; August 1822; July 1824; March 1825. Edinburgh Review. August 1817; November 1820. London Magazine. February 1820; April 1821; May 1821; June 1823; June 1825. Monthly Review. Vol. xcii, p. 53; vol. xcII, p. 59; ibid. p. 250; vol. cI, p. 55; vol. cII, p. 1; vol. cx, p. 113; vol. cxxmII, p. 275. Quarterly Review. Vol. xvII, p. 154; vol. xvIII, p. 458; vol. xxII, p. 158; vol. xxvi, p. 103; vol. xxix, p. 424. B. In other Works Birrell, A. William Hazlitt. (English Men of Letters series.) 1902. Dana, R. H. Poems and Prose Writings. Philadelphia, 1883.-1

TT 17. -

VIIj 1 a!ZZtt 433 De Quincey, T. Works. Ed. Masson, D. Vols. v and vI. 1889. Douady, J. Vie de William Hazlitt, l'Essayiste. Paris, 1907. -- Liste chronologique des oeuvres de William Hazlitt. Paris, 1906. Elton, Oliver. A Survey of English Literature (1780-1830). 1912. Encyclopaedia Britannica. 11th edn. Vol. xII. Cambridge, 1910. Gilchrist, Mrs Anne. Mary Lamb. 1883. Gilfillan, G. William Hazlitt. Galleries of literary portraits. Vol. II. 1857. Hazlitt and Hallam. Galleries of literary portraits. Vol. II. 1857. Haydon, B. R. Correspondence and Table Talk. 2 vols. 1876. Hazlitt, W. C. Memoirs of William Hazlitt. 2 vols. 1867. - Four generations of a literary family: the Hazlitts in England, Ireland, and America; their friends and their fortunes, 1725-1896. 2 vols. 1897. Lamb and Hazlitt: Letters and Records. 1899. Herford, C. H. The Age of Wordsworth. 1899. Hunt, Leigh. Autobiography. 3 vols. 1850. - Dramatic Essays. Edd. Archer, W. and Lowe, R. W. 1894. Ireland, A. List of the writings of William Hazlitt and Leigh Hunt, chronologically arranged and with notes. 1868. William Hazlitt, Essayist and Critic. With memoir. 1889. [This volume contains selections.] Irwin, S. T. Hazlitt and Lamb. The Quarterly Review. Vol. cciv, no. CCCCVI. Jan. 1906. Keats, John. Letters. Ed. Forman, H. B. 1895. Lang, Andrew. Life of John Gibson Lockhart. 2 vols. 1897. Lucas, E. V. The Life of Charles Lamb. 5th edn. 1910. Martineau, Harriet. History of England during the Thirty Years' Peace. 2 vols. 1849-50. Mitford, Mary Russell. Life and Letters. Ed. L'Estrange, A. G. 3 vols. 1870. More, P. E. The Shelburne Essays. 2nd series. 1905. Patmore, Peter George (1786-1855). My Friends and Acquaintance. 3 vols. 1854. -Rejected Articles. 1826. Procter, Bryan Waller (Barry Cornwall). An Autobiographical Fragment and Biographical Notes. Ed. Patmore, Coventry. Boston, 1877. Robinson, H. C. The manuscript of the Diary of Henry Crabb Robinson in the Dr Williams Library, London. [Unpublished.] Saintsbury, G. Hazlitt. Essays in English Literature (1780-1860). 1890. History of Criticism. 3 vols. 1900-4. Stephen, Sir L. Dictionary of National Biography. Vol. xxv. 1891. Hours in a Library. New edn. Vol. I. 1892. Stevenson, R. L. Letters. Ed. Colvin, Sir S. 4 vols. 1911. Stoddard, R. H. Personal Recollections of Lamb, Hazlitt, and others. 1903. Whipple, E. P. Essays and Reviews. 2 vols. 1856. Williams, Orlo. Life and Letters of John Rickman. 1912. Winchester, C. T. A Group of English Essayists. New York, 1910. Wordsworth, W. Letters. Ed. Knight, W. 1907.

E. L. XII.

28434 Bibliography [CH. CHAPTER VIII LAMB I. CHARLES LAMB Bibliographies of the writings of Charles and Mary Lamb have been published as follows: Livingston, Luther S. Bibliography of the first editions in book form of the writings of Charles and Mary Lamb, published prior to Charles Lamb's death in 1834. 1903. Thomson, J. Charles. Bibliography of the writings of Charles and Mary Lamb, etc. 1908. See, also, Hutchinson's edn (1908) and the notes to the various volumes of Lucas's edn (1903-5) (sect. A, post) of the Works of Charles and Mary Lamb. A. Collected Editions (including Letters) and Selections The Works of Charles Lamb. 2 vols. 1818. [Vol. I, with prose dedication to Coleridge, consists of (1) Poems; (2) Sonnets; (3) Blank Verse; (4) John Woodvil, a Tragedy; (5) The Witch, a Dramatic Sketch of the Seventeenth Century; (6) Curious Fragments from a common-place-book of Robert Burton; (7) Rosamund Gray, a Tale; (8) Recollections of Christ's Hospital. Of these (5) was printed for the first time; (4) and (7) had already been published in earlier volumes; and (8) had been printed in The Gentleman's Magazine for June 1813. The poetical portions of (6) were transferred to (1), which consisted of twenty pieces, viz. two from Coleridge's volume of 1797; one from Blank Verse, 1798; the two poetical fragments of Burton, and the ballad from the German from John Woodvil; three from Poetry for Children; one rptd from The Examiner; one from The Reflector; the hitherto unprinted Hester; and eight by Mary Lamb, of which six were new, the remaining two being Helen and one from Poetry for Children. (2) consisted of eleven sonnets, viz. four new; three from Coleridge's volume of 1796; and four from his volume of 1797. Of the five pieces in (3), one came from Lloyd's volume of 1796; three from Coleridge's volume of 1797; and one from Blank Verse, 1798. Vol. ii, with dedicatory sonnet to Martin Charles Burney, consists of (1) Essays; (2) Letters under Assumed Signatures; (3) Mr H , a Farce. The five essays in (1) include a revision of the notes to the Specimens of 1808, under the title, Characters of Dramatic Writers, contemporary with Shakspeare; a new essay On the Poetical Works of George Wither; and the essays on Hogarth, the tragedies of Shakspeare and Specimens of the Writings of Fuller, which had appeared in The Reflector during 1811. Of seven letters in (2), one was from The Morning Post, 1802; five from The Reflector, 1810 and 1811; and one from The Champion, 1814. (3), produced at Drury lane in December 1806, had already been ptd at Philadelphia in 1813, under the title Mr H., or Beware a Bad Name.] The Poetical Works of Charles Lamb. New edn. 1836. 3rd edn. 1838. The Letters of Charles Lamb, with a sketch of his life, by Talfourd, T. N. 2 vols. 1837. Revised and enlarged edn, by Hazlitt, W. C. (Bohn. 2 vols. 1886.T 7

_ _

vIIIj lamb 435 The Works of Charles Lamb. With a sketch of his life, by Talfourd, T. N. 3 vols. 1838. [A reprint of Lamb's Works, 1818, with the addition of the two Elia volumes and some letters.] The Works of Charles Lamb. New edn. [Ed. Talfourd, T. N.] 5 parts. 1840. [A reprint of Lamb's Works, 1818; the two Elia volumes; and Album Verses, with additions to the last made in the Poetical Works of 1836. The letters and Talfourd's life, published in 1837, were also included.] Final Memorials of Charles Lamb; consisting chiefly of his Letters not before published, with sketches of some of his companions, by Talfourd, T. N. 2 vols. 1848. [Included in later issues of Talfourd's edn of Lamb's Works.] Eliana: being the hitherto uncollected writings of Charles Lamb. (Ed. B[abson], J. E.) Boston, 1864. London, 1864. [This volume contained a large number of essays, tales and poems rptd from various sources, and included The Adventures of Ulysses; three tales from Mrs Leicester's School; and The Pawnbroker's Daughter, a farce, which had been ptd in Blackwood's Magazine for January 1830. Much of the collection had been ptd by the editor in The Atlantic Monthly during 1863.] The Complete Correspondence and Works of Charles Lamb, with an essay on his life and genius by Purnell, T., aided by the recollections of the author's adopted daughter [i.e. Emma Isola, wife of the publisher, Edward Moxon]. 4 vols. 1870. [The first volume was originally issued separately in 1868, with an essay by Sala, G. A.] The Complete Works in Prose and Verse of Charles Lamb, from the original edns, with cancelled passages restored, and many pieces now first collected. Ed. and prefaced by Shepherd, R. H. 1874. [The six tales contributed by Lamb to Tales from Shakespear were now printed in a collected edn for the first time. A subsequent rpt (1878) included Poetry for Children.] The Life, Letters, and Writings of Charles Lamb, edited, with Notes and Illustrations, by FitzGerald, Percy. 6 vols. 1875. Dramatic Essays of Charles Lamb. Ed. Matthews, B. 1891. Plays and Dramatic Essays. Ed. Dircks, R. 1893. The Life and Works of Charles Lamb, with introductions and notes by Ainger, Alfred. 12 vols. 1899-1900. [Canon Ainger previously edited Mrs Leicester's School and Tales from Shakespear (1878) and annotated selected volumes of Lamb's works. These appeared in Macmillan's Eversley series in the following order: Essays of Elia (i.e. Elia and The Last Essays), 1883; Poems, Plays, and Miscellaneous Essays, 1884; Mrs Leicester's School and other writings in prose and verse, 1885; Letters of Charles Lamb, newly arranged, with additions, 2 vols., 1888.] The Works of Charles and Mary Lamb. Ed. Lucas, E. Y. 7 vols. 1903-5. The Works of Charles Lamb. Ed. Macdonald, William. 12 vols. 1903. The Letters of Charles Lamb, in which many mutilated words and passages have been restored to their original form; with letters never before published, and facsimiles of original MS letters and poems. 5 vols. Boston (Bibliophile soc.), 1907. [Introduction by Harper, H. H., with notes of facsimile letters by Garnett, R.] The Works in Prose and Verse of Charles and Mary Lamb. Ed. Hutchinson, Thomas. 2 vols. Oxford, 1908.

28-2436 Bibliography [CH. B. Separate Works This list does not include the original appearance of individual poems and essays in periodicals. For a detailed list of these in chronological order, see Hutchinson's edn (1908) of the Works of Charles and Mary Lamb, vol. I, pp. xvii-xlvii, in which the growth of the collected edns of Lamb's works is also traced. Poems on Various Subjects by S. T. Coleridge. Bristol, 1796. [Including four sonnets by Lamb.] Poems on the Death of Priscilla Farmer, by her grandson Charles Lloyd. Bristol and London, 1796. [Including The Grandame, by Lamb.] Poems, by S. T. Coleridge. 2nd edn. Bristol and London, 1797. [Including poems by Charles Lloyd and Poems, by Charles Lamb, of the IndiaHouse. These, fifteen in number, included the five already published in 1796.] Blank Verse, by Charles Lloyd and Charles Lamb. 1798. A Tale of Rosamund Gray and Old Blind Margaret. 1798. John Woodvil, a Tragedy.... To which are added, Fragments of Burton, the Author of the Anatomy of Melancholy. 1802. [The Fragments of Burton included the poems Hypochondriacus and A Ballad noting the Difference of Rich and Poor. The volume also contained the stanzas Helen, by Mary Lamb, and a Ballad from the German, viz. Thekla's song in Schiller's Die Piccolomini. The latter had been printed in Coleridge's Wallenstein, 1800.] The King and Queen of Hearts: with The Rogueries of the Knave who stole away the Queen's Pies. 1805. [Anonymous.] Ed. Lucas, E.. 1902. Tales from Shakespear. Designed for the Use of Young Persons. 2 vols. 1807. [By Charles and Mary Lamb: Charles's name alone appears on the title-page.] Specimens of English Dramatic Poets, who lived about the Time of Shakspeare: with Notes. 1808. New edn, including Lamb's extracts from the Garrick Plays which were ptd in Hone's Table Book for 1826. (Bohn.) 1854, and later issues. The Adventures of Ulysses. 1808. Ed. Lang, A. 1890. Mrs Leicester's School: or, the History of Several Young Ladies, related by themselves. 1809. [By Charles and Mary Lamb: anonymous.] Poetry for Children, entirely original. By the Author of Mrs Leicester's School. 2 vols. 1809. [By Charles and Mary Lamb.] Prince Dorus: or, Flattery put out of Countenance. A poetical version of an ancient tale. 1811. [Anonymous.] Elia. Essays which have appeared under that signature in The London Magazine. 1823. [Twenty-eight essays, including the greater part of Lamb's contributions to The London Magazine from August 1820 to November 1822. Three, viz. On Some of the Old Actors; On the Artificial Comedy of the Last Century; and On the Acting of Mr Munden, were a revision and rearrangement of three essays which had appeared in that magazine in February, April and October 1822. One, Valentine's Day, had originally been ptd in The Examiner for 14,15 February 1819, and had appeared also in The Indicator for 14 February 1821.] Later edns. Numerous edns exist of both series of Elia. Among these may be mentioned the rpt of the first series, with a few reminiscences of the author and his friends, by Oilier, Edmund, 1867. Ollier's short preface was prefixed to a popular edn of both series, 1875. The Essays of Elia and Eliana, previously combined in Bohn's series, 1868, wereVIII] Lamb 437 issued with a memoir by Barry Cornwall (Procter, B. W.), 2 vols., 1879. Ainger's edn of 1883 has been noted above (sect. A). Both series were ed. by Birrell, A., 2 vols., 1888; and rpts under the same editorship appeared in 1890 (1 vol.) and 1900 (2 vols.) A valuable edn of Elia, with notes by Hallward, N. L. and Hill, S. C. was published in 1895; and was succeeded in 1900 by the Last Essays, with notes by Hallward, N. L. and introduction by Hill, S. C. Both series were ed. by Lucas, E. V., 1902: he also contributed notes to an illustrated edn of the first series in the same year. Other edns are those of Bayne, T., with introduction by Birrell, A., 1903; and of Thompson, A. H., 2 vols., Cambridge, 1913. Album Verses, with a Few Others. 1830. [Forty-two pieces, of which twenty-five were new. The remaining seventeen had appeared in various periodicals between 1819 and 1829. The volume also included The Wife's Trial, or The Intruding Widow, a dramatic poem, already ptd in Blackwood's Magazine for December 1828.] The Last Essays of Elia. Being a Sequel to Essays published under that name. 1833. [A pirated second series of Elia had been published at Philadelphia in 1828. This included ten essays from The London Magazine, afterwards ptd in The Last Essays of Elia, and the Character of the Late Elia, which became the preface of the authentic volume. Six other essays from The London Magazine, including Guy Faux, which originally had appeared in The Reflector, were not printed in 1833. Four others were rpts from the Works of 1818, while two more were by Procter, B. W., and one by Cunningham, Allan. The volume of 1833 consisted of the preface already mentioned and twenty-four essays, or thirty-nine, if each of the sixteen Popular Fallacies be counted as a separate essay. Sixteen essays were rptd from The London Magazine (July 1822-August 1825); three from The Englishman's Magazine; one from Moxon's Reflector and The Athenaeum; one from Hone's Table-Book; and the Popular Fallacies and two essays which had been ptd under the same heading, from The New Monthly Magazine. As to later edns of the Last Essays of Elia, see note to Elia, ante.] C. Biography and Criticism See, also, the various introductions to edns of Lamb's Works mentioned under sections A and B, ante. Ainger, A. Charles Lamb, a biography. (English Men of Letters series.) 1882. -- The Letters of Charles Lamb.-How I traced Charles Lamb in Hertfordshire. Lectures and Essays. Vol. ii. 1905. Birrell, A. Lamb. Obiter Dicta. 2nd ser. 1887. - Lamb's Letters. Res Judicatae. 1892. Clarke, Charles Cowden and Mary Cowden. Recollections of Writers... with Letters of Charles Lamb, Leigh Hunt, etc. 1878. De Quincey, T. Works. Ed. Masson, D. Vols. II, v. Edinburgh, 1890. Ellinger, J. ifber das Verhiltnis von Lamb's Tales from Shakespear zu den Shakespear-Stiicken. Englische Studien. Vol. xIX. Leipzig, 1894. FitzGerald, Percy. Charles Lamb; his friends, his haunts, and his books. 1866. Gilchrist, Mrs A. Mary Lamb. 1883. Gilfillan, G. Charles Lamb. Galleries of literary portraits. Vol. ii. 1857.438 Bibliograpphy [CH. Harrison, F. Lamb and Keats. Tennyson, Ruskin, Mill, and other Essays. 1899. Hazlitt, WT. C. The Lambs: their lives, their friends, and their correspondence, etc. 1897. -- Lamb and Hazlitt. Further letters and records, etc. 1900. Lucas, E. V. Bernard Barton and his friends: a record of quiet lives. 1893. Charles Lamb and the Lloyds. 1898. - he Life of Charles Lamb. 2 vols. 1905. Martin, B. E. In the footprints of Lamb. 1891. Pater, W. Charles Lamb. Appreciations. 1889. Paul, H. Charles Lamb. Stray Leaves. 1906. Procter, B. W. (Barry Cornwall). Charles Lamb. 1866. Swinburne, A. C. Charles Lamb and George Wither. Miscellanies. 1886. Talfourd, T. N. See under section A, ante, for the first appearance of his memoir. A new edn, under the title, Memoirs of Charles Lamb, appeared, with notes by FitzGerald, Percy, 2 vols., 1892. Woodberry, G. E. Charles Lamb, or Elia. Makers of Literature. New York. 1900. II. WORKS OF WRITERS CONNECTED WITH LAMB Bernard Barton Selections from the Poems and Letters of Bernard Barton, ed. by his daughter. With a memoir by his son-in-law, Edward FitzGerald. 1849. New edn. 1853. Poems, by an Amateur. 1818. Poems. 1820. 2nd edn with additions. 1821. 4th edn with additions. 1825. Napoleon and other Poems. 1822. 2nd edn, entitled Minor Poems, including Napoleon. 1824. Poetic Vigils. 1824. A Widow's Tale, and other poems. 1827. Household Verses. 1845. See, also, Lucas, E. V., in section c, ante. Charles Lloyd Poems on various subjects. Carlisle, 1795. Edmund Oliver. 2 vols. Bristol, 1798. The Tragedies of Vittorio Alfieri, transl. from the Italian. 1815. Nugae Canorae. Poems. 3rd edn with additions. 1819. Isabel, a tale. 2 vols. 1820. Desultory Thoughts in London: Titus and Gisippus, with other poems. 1821. Poetical Essays on the character of Pope, as a poet and moralist; and on the language and objects most fit for poetry. 1821. The Duke d'Ormond, a tragedy; and Beritola, a tale. 1822. Poems. 1823. See, also, section B, ante, and Lucas, E. V., in section c, ante. James White Original Letters, &c., of Sir John Falstaff and His Friends; now first made public by a Gentleman, a Descendant of Dame Quickly, from Genuine Manuscripts which have been in the possession of the Quickly Family near Four Hundred Years. 1796. 2nd edn with abbreviated title. 1797. [The book is generally recognised as the joint work of White and Lamb.]ix] The Landors, Leigh Hunt, De Quincey 439

CHAPTER IX THE LANDORS, LEIGH HUNT, DE QUINCEY I. WALTER SAVAGE LANDOR For the bibliography of Landor see his Letters and other unpublished writings, ed. Wheeler, S., 1897 (sect. A, post); also the Athenaeum, 31 May and 12 July 1902 and Notes and Queries, 13 May 1911. A. Collections and Selections Works. 2 vols. 1846. Selections. Ed. Hillard, G. S. Boston, Mass., 1856. Cameos selected from the works of W. S. Landor. Edd. Stedman, E. C. and Aldrich, T. B. Boston, Mass., 1874. Works, with life by Forster, J. 8 vols. 1876. Selections. Ed. Colvin, S. (Golden Treasury series.) 1882. Works. Ed. Crump, C. G. 10 vols. 1891-3. [Imaginary Conversations, 6 vols.; Poems, Dialogues in Verse, and Epigrams, 2 vols.; Longer Prose Works, 2 vols.] Letters and other unpublished writings. Ed. Wheeler, S. 1897. Selections. Ed. Clymer, W. B. S. Boston, Mass., 1898. Letters private and public. Ed. Wheeler, S. 1899. Shorter Works. 1904. B. Separate Works Poems of Walter Savage Landor. 1795. A Moral Epistle [in verse] respectfully dedicated to Earl Stanhope. 1795. Gebir. 1798. 2nd edn. Oxford, 1803. Latin version. Oxford, 1803. Poems from the Arabic and Persian: with notes by the Author of Gebir. Warwick, 1800. Poetry by the Author of Gebir. Warwick, 1800. [Suppressed.] Poetry by the Author of Gebir. 1802. Simonidea. Bath, 1806. The Dun Cow: an hyper-satirical dialogue in verse. With explanatory notes. 1808. [Landor's anonymous reply to Guy's Porridge Pot.] Three Letters written in Spain to D. Francisco Riguelme. 1809. Ode ad Gustavum Regem. Ode ad Gustaavum Exulem. 1810. Count Julian. A Tragedy. 1812. Commentary on Memoirs of Mr Fox, lately written [by John Bernard Trotter]. 1812. Ed. Wheeler, S. 1907. Letters addressed to Lord Liverpool and the Parliament on the preliminaries of Peace. By Calvus. 1814. Idyllia nova quinque Heronm atque Heroidum. Oxford, 1815. Sponsalia Polyxenae. Pistoia, 1819. Idyllia Heroica decem, etc. Pisa, 1820. Poche osservazioni sullo stato attuale di que' popoli che vogliono governarsi per mezzo delle rappresentanze. Naples, 1821. An English trans. appeared.44o

Bibliography

[CH.

Imaginary Conversations. Vols. I, II. 1824. 2nd edn, enlarged. 1826. Vols. III, iv. 1828. Vol. v. 1829. Imaginary Conversations of Greeks and Romans. 1853. Selections. Ed. Ellis, H. 1886. Selections. Ed. Mahaffy, J. P. 1909. Ed. Cavenagh, F. A. 1914. German trans. 1878. Gebir, Count Julian, and other Poems. 1831. Latin Poems and Conversations. Philological Museum. Cambridge, 1832-3. Citation and Examination of William Shakespeare touching deer-stealing. To which is added a Conference of Edmund Spenser with the Earl of Essex. 1834. Rptd 1891. The Letters of a Conservative, in which are shown the only means of saving what is left of the English Church. 1836. Terry Hogan. Edited by Phelim Octavius Quarle. 1836. [Attributed to L.] Pericles and Aspasia. 2 vols. 1836. 2 vols. Philadelphia, 1839. Ed. Crump, C. G. 2 vols. 1890. Rptd 1903. A Satire upon Satirists and Admonition to Detractors. 1836. The Death of Clytemnestra. 1836. [Included in Friendly Contributions for the benefit of three Infant Schools in Kensington. Printed for Lady Mary Fox.] The Pentameron and Pentalogia. 1837. The Pentameron and other Imaginary Conversations. Ed. Ellis, H. 1889. Literary Hours, by various friends. 1837. [Ed. Ablett, J. Contains six Imaginary Conversations and other contributions by Landor.] High and Low Life in Italy. Monthly Repository. Aug. 1837-April 1838. French trans. of a portion of this by Larbaud, V. Paris, 1911. Andrea of Hungary and Giovanna of Naples. 1839. Fra Rupert; the last part of a trilogy: the first being Andrea of Hungary, the second being Giovanna of Naples. 1840. La Petite Chouannerie. By A. F. Rio. 1842. [Contains a long poem by Landor, never rptd.] The Hellenics of Walter Savage Landor, enlarged and completed. 1847. New edn. 1859. The Hellenics and Gebir. 1907. Poemata et Inscriptiones. 1847. Imaginary Conversation of King Carlo Alberto and the Duchess of Belgioioso on the affairs of Italy. 1848. The Italics of Walter Savage Landor. 1848. Statement of occurrences at Llanbedr. Bath, 1849. Popery, British and Foreign. 1851, 1853. The Last Fruit off an Old Tree. 1853. Letters of an American, mainly on Russia and Revolution, edited by W. S. Landor. 1854. [By Landor.] A Letter from W. S. Landor to R. W. Emerson. Bath, 1856. Antony and Octavius. (Scenes for the study.) 1856. Dry Sticks fagoted. 1858. Savonarola e il Priore di San Marco. Florence, 1860. English trans. in London Review. 22 Sept. 1860. Letters of a Canadian. 1862. [No copy known at present.] Heroic Idyls, with additional Poems. 1863. Swift, W. Wilhelm's Wanderings. 1878. [Contains some verses by Landor, and other matter relating to him.] Letters to Miss Boyle. Century Illustrated Monthly Magazine. Feb. 1888. Letter to R. W. Emerson. Literary Anecdotes of the Nineteenth Century. Ed. Nicoll, W. R. and Wise, T. J. Vol. ii. 1896. Unpublished Letters of Landor to Walter Birch. Ed. Tatham, E. H. R. Fortnightly Review. Feb. 1910.IX] The Landors, Leigh Hunt, De Quincey 441 C. Biography and Criticism Betham, E. The Llanthony Maze. A House of Letters. 1905. Blessington, Marguerite Gardiner, Countess of. The Idler in Italy. Vol. in. 1839. Literary life and correspondence of the Countess of Blessington. By Madden, R. R. 3 vols. 1855. Bradley, W. The Early Poems of Walter Savage Landor. A study of his development and debt to Milton. 1914. Colvile, F. L. Walter Savage Landor. Worthies of Warwickshire. 1869. Colvin, Sir S. Landor. (English Mien of Letters series.) 1881. Crosse, Mrs Andrew. Walter Savage Landor. Temple Bar. June 1891. R ed Letter Days of my Life. 1892. De Quincey, T. On Landor. Works. Vols. VIII, Ix, xi. Edinburgh, 1862-3. De Vere, A. Landor's Poetry. Essays chiefly on poetry. Vol. ii. 1887. Dickens, Charles. Landor's Life. [A Review of Forster's Biography.] All the Year Round. 24 July 1869. Duke, R. E. H. The Family of Savage of Warwickshire. 1902. Pedigree of the paternal ancestry of W. S. Landor. 1912. Emerson, R. W. English Traits. 1856. Evans, E. W. Walter Savage Landor: a critical study. New York, 1892. Field, Kate. Landor's Last Years in Italy. Atlantic Monthly. April, May, June, 1856. Forster, J. Walter Savage Landor: a biography. 1869. Gilfillan, G. Walter Savage Landor. Galleries of literary portraits. Vol. 11. 1857. Horne, R. H. A New Spirit of the Age. 2 vols. 1844. Ed. Jerrold, W. 1907. Houghton, R. M. Milnes, Lord. Monographs, personal and social. 1873. Hunt, L. Lord Byron and some of his contemporaries. 1828. Layard, G. S. Mrs Lynn Lynton. 1901. [Contains Letters by Landor.] Lynton, E. Lynn. Reminiscences of Walter Savage Landor. Fraser's Magazine. July 1870. Lytton, Bulwer, Lady. Reminiscences of Walter Savage Landor. Tinsley's Magazine. June 1883. Robinson, H. Crabb. Diary, reminiscences, and correspondence. Ed. Sadler, T. 3 vols. 1869. Saintsbury, G. Walter Savage Landor. Essays in English literature, 1780 -1860. 2nd ser. 1895. Sawle, Rose, Lady Graves. Sketches from her Diary. [Privately ptd.] 1908. [Lady Graves Sawle was Rose Aylmer's niece.] Schlaak, R. Entstehungs- und Textgeschichte von Landor's Gebir. Halle, 1909. Southey, R. Life and Correspondence. Ed. Southey, C. C. 6 vols. 1849-50. Selections from the Letters of Robert Southey. Ed. Warter, J. W. 4 vols. 1856. Stephen, Sir L. Landor's Imaginary Conversations. Hours in a Library. New edn. 1892. Swinburne, A. C. Landor. Encyclopaedia Britannica. 9th edn. Vol. xIv. 1882. Landor. Miscellanies. 1886. Thompson, Francis. Landor. The Academy. 27 Feb. 1897. Whiting, L. The Florence of Landor. 1905. Woodberry, G. E. Makers of Literature. New York, 1900.442 Bibliography [CH. II. ROBERT EYRES LANDOR An Essay on the Character and Doctrines of Socrates. Oxford, 1802. The Count Arezzi. A Tragedy in five acts. 1824. The Impious Feast. A Poem in ten books. 1828. The Earl of Brecon. A Tragedy in five acts.-Faith's Fraud. A Tragedy in five acts.-The Ferryman. A Drama in five acts. 1841. The Fawn of Sertorius. 1846. The Fountain of Arethusa. 2 vols. 1848. Colvile, F. L. Worthies of Warwickshire. Warwick, 1869. Edinburgh Review. Vol. xcii, no. 188. 1850. Swinburne, A. C. Recollections of Professor Jowett. Studies. 1894. III. JAMES HENRY LEIGH HUNT A. Selections Essays. With introduction and notes by Oilier, E. 1869. New edn. 1890. Characteristics of Leigh Hunt as exhibited in Leigh Hunt's London Journal, 1834-5. With illustrative notes by Lancelot Cross [i.e. Carr, F.]. 1878. Essays. Ed. Symons, A. 1887,1903. Leigh Hunt as Poet and Essayist: the choicest passages selected with biographical introduction by Kent, C. 1889. Essays and Poems. Selected and ed. by Johnson, R. B. 2 vols. 1891. Tales from Leigh Hunt: with memoir by Knight, W. 1891. Dramatic Essays. Edd. Archer, W. and Lowe, R. W. 1894. B. Separate Works Juvenilia: or a collection of Poems written between the ages of twelve and sixteen. 1801. 2nd edn, revised. 1802. Critical Essays on the performers of the London Theatres, including general observations on the practice and genius of the Stage. 1807. 2nd edn. 1808. Classic Tales, with critical essays on the merits and reputation of the authors. 5 vols. 1807. 5 vols. 1813. The Examiner. Ed. by Leigh Hunt. 1808-21. An Attempt to shew the Folly and Danger of Methodism. 1809. The Reflector. Nos. 1-4. Ed. by Leigh Hunt. 1810. The Reformist's Reply to The Edinburgh Review. 1810. The Feast of the Poets. With notes, and other pieces in verse. By the Editor of the Examiner. 1814. 2nd edn. 1815. The Descent of Liberty. A Mask. 1815. The Story of Rimini. 1816. The Round Table. By William Hazlitt. 2 vols. 1817. [Twelve of the fifty-two papers are by Leigh Hunt.] Foliage, or Poems original and translated. 1818. Hero and Leander and Bacchus and Ariadne. 1819. The Indicator. 13 Oct. 1819-21 March 1821 [at which point Leigh Hunt retired from the paper]. 2 vols. 1820-1. Rptd 1822,1834. The Literary Pocket-Book. 1819-22. Amyntas: a Tale of the Woods. From the Italian of Tasso. 1820. The Months, descriptive of the successive beauties of the year. 1821. Rptd, ed. Andrews, W., 1897.ix] The Landors, Leigh Hunt, De Quincey 443 The Liberal. Verse and Prose from the South. 4 nos. 1822-3. The Literary Examiner. 27 nos. 5 July 1823-27 Dec. 1823. Ultra-Crepidarius. A Satire on W. Gifford. 1823. Bacchus in Tuscany. A dithyrambic poem from the Italian of Francesco Redi; with notes original and select. 1825. Lord Byron, and some of his Contemporaries. 1828. 2nd edn. 2 vols. 1828. The Companion. 28 nos. 1828. The Chat of the Week. 13 nos. 1830. The Tatler. A Daily Journal of Literature and the Stage. 4 Sept. 1830 -13 Feb. 1832. Poetical Works. 1832, 1844. Ed. Lee, S. Adams. 2 vols. Boston, Mass., 1857. Now finally collected, revised by himself, and edited by his son, Hunt, Thornton. 1860. Sir Ralph Esher. A Romance. 3 vols. 1832. 2nd edn. 1836. 3rd edn. 1850. Christianism: or, belief and unbelief reconciled; being exercises and meditations. [Privately ptd.] 1832. Re-issued as The Religion of the Heart. 1853. The Indicator and The Companion. [A selection of the best papers in these periodicals written in 1819-21 and in 1828.] 2 vols. 1834,1840. Leigh Hunt's London Journal. 1834-5. Captain Sword and Captain Pen. 1835. 3rd edn. 1849. The Monthly Repository. July 1837-March 1838. The Seer: or, common-places refreshed. 2 vols. 1840-1. A Legend of Florence. A Play. 1840. 2nd edn. 1840. The Dramatic Works of Wycherley, Congreve, Vanbrugh, and Farquhar. With introductory biographical and critical notices by Leigh Hunt. 1840. The Dramatic Works of R. B. Sheridan. With a biographical and critical sketch of Sheridan by Leigh Hunt. 1840. Chaucer Modernized. [By Leigh Hunt, and others.] 1841. The Palfrey. A Love Story of Old Times. 1842. One Hundred Romances of Real Life. Selected and annotated by Leigh Hunt. 1843. New edn. 1888. Imagination and Fancy: or, Selections from the English Poets illustrative of those first requisites of their art.... With an essay in answer to the question, 'What is Poetry?' 1844. 3rd edn. 1852. New edn. 1891. Wit and Humour selected from the English Poets: with an illustrative essay and critical comments. 1846, 1852. New edn. 1890. Stories from the Italian Poets, with lives of the writers. 2 vols. 1846. 2 vols. 1854. Rptd 1907. Men, Women, and Books. A selection of sketches, essays, and critical memoirs from his uncollected prose writings. 2 vols. 1847. New edn. 1891. A Jar of Honey from Mount Hybla. 1848, 1852. New edn. 1897. The Town, its memorable Characters and Events. 2 vols. 1848. New edn. 1889, 1893. A Book for a Corner, or selections in prose and verse... with comments. 2 vols. 1849. 3rd edn. 1858. Readings for Railways. 1849. Autobiography, with reminiscences of friends and contemporaries. 3 vols. 1850. Enlarged and revised edn. 1860. New edn. 1891. Ed. Ingpen, R. 1903. Leigh Hunt's Journal. 7 Dec. 1850-29 March 1851.444 Bibliograpy [CH. Table Talk: to which are added Imaginary Conversations of Pope and Swift. 1851. New edn. 1882. The Old Court Suburb, or memorials of Kensington. 2 vols. 1855. 3rd edn. 1860. Ed. Dobson, A. 2 vols. 1902. Beaumont and Fletcher, or the finest scenes, lyrics, and other beauties selected from those two poets, to the exclusion of whatever is morally objectionable: with opinions of distinguished critics, and an introductory preface. 1855. Stories in Verse. 1855. A Saunter through the West End. 1861. [Rptd from The Atlas newspaper.] Correspondence. Ed. by his Eldest Son. 2 vols. 1862. The Book of the Sonnet. Ed. by Leigh Hunt and S. Adams Lee. 2 vols. 1867. A Day by the Fire; and other papers, hitherto uncollected. 1870. The Wishing-Cap Papers. 1874. [Rptd from The Examiner.] C. Biography and Criticism Clarke, C. C. and M. C. Recollections of Writers, with Letters of Leigh Hunt, and others. 1878. Fields, Mrs J. T. A Shelf of Old Books. 1894. Hazlitt, W. Mr T. Moore-Mr Leigh Hunt. The Spirit of the Age. 1825. Works. Edd. Waller, A. R. and Glover, A. Vol. iv. 1902. Ireland, A. List of the Writings of William Hazlitt and Leigh Hunt. 1868. Art. Hunt, James Henry Leigh. D. of N. B. Vol. xxvII. 1891. Johnson, R. B. Leigh Hunt. 1896. Macaulay, Lord. Leigh Hunt. Edinburgh Review. Jan. 1841. Rptd in Macaulay's Literary Essays. Oxford, 1913. Monkhouse, C. Life of Leigh Hunt. (Great Writers series.) 1893. Punchard, C. D. Helps to the study of Leigh Hunt's Essays. 1899. Saintsbury, G. Leigh Hunt. Essays in English Literature, 1780-1860. 1890. IV. THOMAS DE QUINCEY A. Collections and Selections Writings. 22 vols. Boston, 1851-9. Reissued 12 vols. Boston, 1877. Works. 14 vols. Edinburgh, 1853-60. 2nd edn. 15 vols. and Suppl. 2 vols. Edinburgh, 1862-78. 4th edn. 16 vols. Edinburgh, 1878. Select Essays. Ed. Masson, D. 2 vols. Edinburgh, 1888. A Selection of his best works. Ed. Bennett, W. H. 2 vols. 1889. Collected Writings. New and enlarged edn by Masson, D. 14 vols. Edinburgh, 1889-90. Uncollected Writings. Ed. Hogg, J. 2 vols. 1890. 2nd edn. 1892. Posthumous Works. Ed. Japp, A. H. 2 vols. 1891-3. Selected Essays. Ed. Douglas, Sir G. 1895. The Opium Eater and selected Essays. Ed. Le Gallienne, R. 1898. Essays. Ed. Whibley, C. 1904. Literary Criticism. Ed. Darbishire, H. 1909. B. Separate Works Confessions of an English Opium Eater. 1822. 2nd edn. 1823. New and greatly enlarged edn. Edinburgh, 1856. Ed. Garnett, R., with notes of De Quincey's conversations by Woodhouse, R. and other additions.ix] The Landors, Leigh Hunt, De Quincey 445 1885. 1891. Ed. Masson, D. 1904. Translated into French, German and Italian. Klosterheim, or The Masque. Edinburgh, 1832. The Logic of Political Economy. Edinburgh, 1844. C. Biography and Criticism ' Barine, Arvede' [Mme Vincens] Nevroses: De Quincey, etc. Paris, 1898. Birrell, A. Essays about Men, Women, and Books. 1901. Burton, J. H. The Bookhunter. New edn. Edinburgh, 1885. Christoph, F. Uber den Einfluss Jean Paul Fr. Richters auf Thomas de Quincey. Programm. Hof, 1899. Dunn, W. A. Thomas De Quincey's Relation to German literature and philosophy. Diss. Strassburg, 1901. Durand, W. Y. De Quincey and Carlyle in their relation to the Germans. Publ. of the Mod. Lang. Assoc. of America. xxII. 1907. Findlay, J. R. Personal Recollections of De Quincey. Edinburgh, 1886. Froude, J. A. Life of Carlyle, 1795-1835. Vol. I. 1882. Gilfillan, G. Thomas De Quincey. Galleries of literary portraits. Vol. II. 1857. Gillies, R. P. Memoirs of a literary veteran. Vol. II. 1851. Gordon, Mrs Mary. Christopher North. 2 vols. Edinburgh, 1862. Green, J. A. Thomas De Quincey: a bibliography based upon the De Quincey collection in the Moss Side library, Manchester. 1908. Hodgson, Shadworth H. Outcast Essays. 1881. Hogg, J. De Quincey and his friends. 1895. Japp, A. H. Thomas De Quincey: his life and writings, with unpublished correspondence. 2 vols. 1877. 2nd edn. 1879. New edn. 1890. -De Quincey Memorials: being letters and other records, here first published. With communications from Coleridge, the Wordsworths, Hannah More, Prof. Wilson, and others. Ed. Japp, A. H. 2 vols. 1891. Knight, C. Passages of a working life. Vol. i. 1864. Lowndes, W. T. The Bibliographer's Manual. Ed. Bohn, H. G. Pt. viI. Art. Quincey. 1861. Martineau, H. Biographical Sketches. 1869. Mason, E. T. Personal Traits of British authors. Vol. II. New York, 1885. Masson, D. Wordsworth, Shelley, Keats, and other Essays. 1874. Thomas De Quincey. (English Men of Letters series.) 1881. Minto, W. A Manual of English Prose Literature. Edinburgh, 1886. Payn, James. Some literary recollections. 1884. Pollitt, Charles. De Quincey's editorship of the Westmorland Gazette. Kendal, 1890. Saintsbury, G. De Quincey. Essays in English literature, 1780-1860. 1890. Salt, H. S. De Quincey. 1904. Stephen, Sir L. Hours in a Library. New edn. Vol. i. 1892. Symons, A. A Word on De Quincey. Studies in prose and verse. 1904.

A. T. B.446

Bibliography

[CH.

CHAPTER X JANE AUSTEN I. WORKS A. Collected Editions Novels. 5 vols. 1833. Works. With memoir by Austen-Leigh, J. E. 6 vols. 1882. Novels. Ed. Johnson, R. B. 10 vols. Illustrated by Cooke, W. C. 1892. Illustrated by Brock, C. E. and H. M. 1898. - ith introductions by Dobson, A. and illustrations by Thomson, H. and Brock, C.E. 5 vols. 1895-7. (Winchester edn.) 10 vols. 1898. Works. (Temple edn.) 10 vols. 1899. Duologues and scenes from the novels of Jane Austen, arranged and adapted for drawing-room performance by Rosina Filippi (Mrs Dowson). 1895. B. Separate Works Sense and Sensibility. A novel, in three volumes. By a Lady. 1811. Ed. Jacobs, J. 1899. Transl. into French by Montolieu, Mme Isabelle de. 4 vols. Paris, 1815. Pride and Prejudice. A novel, in three volumes. By the Author of Sense and Sensibility. 1813. Ed. Saintsbury, G. Illustrated by Thomson, H. 1894. Transl. into French. 4 vols. Paris, 1822. Mansfield Park. A novel, in three volumes. By the Author of Sense and Sensibility. 1814. Transl. into French by Villemain, H. 4 vols. Paris, 1816. Emma. A novel, in three volumes. By the Author of Pride and Prejudice, etc. 1816. Ed. Jacobs, J. 1898. Transl. into French. 4 vols. Paris, 1816. Northanger Abbey; and Persuasion. By the Author of Pride and Prejudice, etc. With a biographical notice of the author. 4 vols. 1818. Northanger Abbey transl. into French by Ferrieres, Mine Hyacinthe de. 3 vols. Paris, 1824. Persuasion transl. into French by Montolieu, Mme Isabelle de. 2 vols. Paris, 1821. Charades, etc. written a hundred years ago by Jane Austen and her family. (1895.) Letters. Ed. Edward, Lord Brabourne. 2 vols. 1884. II. BIOGRAPHY AND CRITICISM See, also, the introductions to various editions of Jane Austen's works in sect. I, ante. Adams, 0. F. The story of Jane Austen's life. 1891. Austen-Leigh, J. E. Memoir of Jane Austen. 1870. 2nd edn, to which is added Lady Susan and fragments of two other unfinished tales. 1871. Austen-Leigh, W. and R. A. Jane Austen, her life and letters. A family record. 1913. Bonnell, H. H. Charlotte Bronte, George Eliot, and Jane Austen. 1902.'Ve "



xj jane.luste 447 Bradley, A. C. Jane Austen. (Essays and Studies by Members of the English Association. Vol. ii.) Oxford, 1911. Brinton, S. G. Old Friends and New Fancies. An imaginative sequel to the novels of Jane Austen. 1913. Cornish, F. W. Jane Austen. (English Men of Letters series.) 1913. Fitzgerald, P. Jane Austen. A criticism and appreciation. 1912. Helm, W. H. Jane Austen and her country-house comedy. 1909. Hill, C. Jane Austen, her homes and her friends. 1902. Hubback, J. H. and E. C. Jane Austen's Sailor Brothers. 1906. Jack, A. A. Essays on the novel as illustrated by Scott and Jane Austen. 1897. Macaulay, Lord. Opinion of Jane Austen. In art. on Mme D'Arblay. Edinburgh Review. Jan. 1843. Rptd in Critical and Historical Essays contributed to the Edinburgh Review. Ed. Montague, F. C. Vol. III. 1903. Malden, Mrs S. F. Jane Austen. 1889. Mitton, G. E. Jane Austen and her Times. 1905. Pellew, W. G. Jane Austen's novels. Boston, U.S., 1883. Pollock, W. H. Jane Austen, her contemporaries and herself. An essay in criticism. 1899. Raleigh, Sir W. The English Novel. 1894. Popular edn. 1903. Ritchie, Lady. A Book of Sibyls: Mrs Barbauld-Miss Edgeworth-Mrs Opie-Miss Austen. 1883. Sackville, Lady Margaret. Jane Austen. 1912. Scott, Sir W. On Jane Austen. Quarterly Review. Oct. 1815. Rptd in Famous Reviews. Ed. Johnson, R. B. 1914. Smith, Goldwin. Life of Jane Austen [with bibliography by Anderson, J. P.]. (Great Writers series.) 1890. Tytler, S. Jane Austen and her works. [1880.] Whately, R. Archbishop Whately on Jane Austen and her novels. The Quarterly Review. Jan. 1821. Rptd in Famous Reviews. Ed. Johnson, R.B. 1914. A. T. B. CHAPTER XI LESSER NOVELISTS Adams, W. (1814-1848). Sacred Allegories. 1849. Ainsworth, William Harrison. Rookwood: a Romance. 3 vols. 1834. With illustrations by George Cruikshank. 1836. Crichton.... 3 vols. 1837. With illustrations by Phiz. 1849. -- Jack Sheppard. With illustrations by George Cruikshank. 3 vols. 1839. [First appeared as a serial in Bentley's Miscellany. 1839-40.] - The Tower of London. Illustrated by George Cruikshank. 1840. [Issued in monthly parts; wrappers, and the 40 full page etchings and 58 woodcuts all by Cruikshank.] Also 1840, 1845 and 1853. Guy Fawkes; or, the Gunpowder Treason: an Historical Romance.... With illustrations by George Cruikshank. 3 vols. 1841. Also 1857. [First published in Bentley's Miscellany.] Old Saint Paul's: a Tale of the Plague and the Fire.... With illustrations by John Franklin. 1841. [Issued in monthly parts in wrappers designed by George Cruikshank. Appeared first in The Sunday Times, Jan. to Dec. 1841.] Another edn with two extra plates by Phiz. 1847.448 Bibliograp/y [CH. Ainsworth, William Harrison. The Lancashire Witches: a Romance of Pendle Forest. 3 vols. 1849. [Originally published in The Sunday Times during 1848. A limited private edn was printed from same type for presentation to friends. 1849.] First illustrated edn (by Gilbert). 1854. - The South Sea Bubble: a Tale of the Year 1720.... With nineteen illustrations by Corbould, E. H. [? 1868.] [First appeared in Bow Bells during 1868. The first edn is very scarce.] With nineteen illustrations. [1902.] And many other romances. Ellis, S. M. William Harrison Ainsworth and his friends. 2 vols. 1911. [With a full bibliography.] Balfour, Alexander (1767-1829). The Farmer's Three Daughters. 1822. The Foundling of Glenthorn, or the Smugglers' Cave. 1823. - Highland Mary. 4 vols. 1826. - Weeds and Wildflowers.... With a memoir of the author. Edinburgh, 1830. Bury, Lady Charlotte Susan Maria (1775-1861). Conduct is fate. 1822. -Flirtation. A novel. 1828. -Separation. A novel. 1830. - The Disinherited. 1834. - The Devoted. 1836. Memoirs of a Peeress; or, The Days of Fox.... Ed. by Lady C. S. M. C[ampbell afterwards Bury]. The Two Baronets. A novel of fashionable life. 1864. - The Court of England under George IV. Founded on a Diary Interspersed with Letters written by Queen Caroline and various other Distinguished Persons. 2 vols. 1896. See the introduction to the 1908 edn of the Diary, ed. Steuart, A. Francis. [The Diary of a Lady-in-Waiting, etc.] Chamier, Frederick. The Life of a Sailor. 1832.  Ben Brace, the last of Nelson's Agamemnons. 3 vols. 1836. - The Arethusa. A naval story. 3 vols. 1837. Jack Adams, the Mutineer. 3 vols. 1838. - Tom Bowling: a tale of the sea. 3 vols. 1841. The Times, 2 Nov. 1870. Clive, Caroline (1801-1873). Paul Ferrol. A tale. Collection of British Authors. Vol. 364. 1841, etc. Cockton, Henry (1807-1853). The Life and Adventures of Valentine Vox, the Ventriloquist. 1840. Sylvester Sound, The Somnambulist. (Illustrated by Onwhyn.) 1844. The Gentleman's Magazine. Vol. XL, p. 212. Aug. 1853. Croly, George. Salathiel. A story of the Past, the Present and the Future. 1829. Marston; or, the Soldier and Statesman. 3 vols. 1846. Crowe, Catherine. Adventures of Susan Hopley; or Circumstantial Evidence. 1841. -- The Story of Lilly Dawson. 3 vols. 1847. - The Night Side of Nature; or, Ghosts and Ghost Seers. 2 vols. 1848. Digby, Kenelm Henry (1800-1880). The Broadstone of Honour: or, Rules for the Gentlemen of England. 1822. - The Broadstone of Honour: or, the true sense and practice of Chivalry. The First Book, Godefridus. The Second Book, Tancredus. The Fourth Book, Orlandus. 3 vols. 1829-8.T 7AT 7 -

'"'1

XIj Lesser iVovelsts 449 Ferrier, Susan Edmondstone. Marriage, a novel. 1818. - The Inheritance. 1824. - Destiny; or the Chief's Daughter. 1831. Memoir and Correspondence of Susan Ferrier, 1782-1864. Ed. Doyle, J. A. 1898. Galt, John. The Annals of the Parish. 1821. The Ayrshire Legatees. 1821. - The Entail; or, the Lairds of Grippy. 1823. The Autobiography of J. G. 2 vols. 1833. The Literary Life and Miscellanies of J. G. 3 vols. 1834. [For full bibliography, see D. of N. B. vol. xx.] Glascock, William Nugent. Naval Sketch-Book.... By an officer of rank [W. N.G.]. 1826. Land Sharks and Sea Gulls. 3 vols. 1838. Gleig, G. R. (1796-1888). The Subaltern. 1825. Gore, Catherine Grace Francis. Mothers and Daughters; a tale of the Year 1830. 1831. -- Mrs Armytage, or Female Domination. 1836. Haliburton, Thomas Chandler (1796-1865). A Historical and Statistical Account of Nova Scotia. 2 vols. 1829. - The Clockmaker, or Sayings and Doings of Samuel Slick of Slickville. 1837-40. [In three series.] The Bubbles of Canada. 1839. - The Letter-bag of the Great Western, or Life in a Steamer. 1839. The Old Judge, or Life in a Colony. 2 vols. 1843. Sam Slick's Saws and Modern Instances. 2 vols. 1843. Traits of American Humour by Native Authors. 1843. - The Attache, or Sam Slick in England. 4 vols. 1843-4. - Rule and Misrule of the English in America. 2 vols. 1850. - Nature and Human Nature. 1855. Crofton, F. B. Haliburton: the man and the writer. 1897. O'Brien, A. H. Haliburton (Sam Slick): a sketch and bibliography. 1909. Hamilton, T. (1789-1842). Cyril Thornton. 1827. Hogg, James (1770-1835). Confessions of a Justified Sinner. 1824. Hook, Theodore. Sayings and Doings. First (-third) series. 1839. Jack Brag. [A novel.] 1837. - Fathers and Sons: a novel. 3 vols. 1842. Lockhart, J. G. Theodore Hook: a sketch. 4th edn. 1853. Saintsbury, G. Essays in English Literature, 1780-1860. Second series. 1895. Howard, Edward Granville George (d. 1841). Rattlin the Reefer. 3 vols. 1836. The Old Commodore. 3 vols. 1837. - Outward Bound; or, a Merchant's Adventure. 1838. Jack Ashore. 3 vols. 1840. - Sir Henry Morgan, the Buccaneer. 3 vols. 1842. The Marine Ghost. [Tales from Bentley, pt I. 1859, etc.] Hood, Thomas. New Monthly Magazine. Vol. LXIV, pp.438-441. 1842. James, George Payne Rainsford. Richelieu: a tale of France. 1829. - Darnley; or, The Field of the Cloth of Gold. 1830. - Mary of Burgundy.... By the author of Darnley. 1833. - Agnes Sorel, an historical romance. 3 vols. 1853. - The Works of G. P. R. James, revised and corrected by the Author. With an introductory preface. 21 vols. 1844-9.

E. L. XII.

29450 Bibliography [cH. Knight, Ellis Cornelia (1757-1837). Dinarbas: a tale. 1790. - Sir Guy de Lusignan. A tale of Italy. 2 vols. 1833. Kaye, Sir J. W. (ed.). Autobiography of Miss C. K. lady companion to the Princess Charlotte of Wales. With extracts from her journal and anecdote books. 1861. Lamb, Lady Caroline (1785-1828). Glenarvon. 3 vols. 1816. Another edn entitled The Fatal Passion. [1865.] [The tale contains a caricature portrait of Byron.] - A New Canto. 1819. - Graham Hamilton. 2 vols. 1822. - Ada Reis, a tale. 1823. Another edn. 2 vols. Paris, 1824. Smiles, Samuel. A Publisher and his Friends. 1891. Landon, Letitia Elizabeth. Lady Anne Granard; or, keeping up Appearances. 3 vols. 1824. - Ethel Churchill; or, The Two Brides. 1837. The Miscellaneous Poetical Works of L. E. L. 1835. The Poetical Works of L. E. Landon.... Ed. with an introductory memoir and illustrations, by Scott, W. B. [1873.] Blanchard, Laman. Life and literary remains of L. E. L. 2 vols. 1876. Lauder, Sir Thomas Dick (1784-1848). Lochandhu. A tale of the Eighteenth Century. 1825. - The Wolfe of Badenoch: an historical romance. 1827. Highland Rambles and Long Legends to shorten the way. Edinburgh, 1837. - Legendary Tales of the Highlands. A sequel to Highland Rambles. 3 vols. 1841. Constable, Thomas. Archibald Constable and his literary correspondents. Vol. i, pp. 432-8. 3 vols. 1873. Le Noir, Elizabeth Anne (? 1755-1841). Village Annals, a Scene in Domestic Life. 2 vols. 1803. -Village Anecdotes; or, the journal of a year, from Sophia to Edward. With original poems. 3 vols. 1804. Second edn. With additional characters and poems.... Revised by the author. 3 vols. Reading, [1807]. - Clara de Montfier; a moral tale. With original poems, etc. 3 vols. Reading, 1808. - The Maid of La Vendee, being a second edition of Clara de Montfier... with critical remarks by Dr Burney, and the Rev. C. Hunter, etc. 3 vols. Reading, 1819. Lister, Thomas Henry. Granby. A novel. 1826.  Herbert Lacy. A novel. 1828. - Arlington. A novel. [1832.] Macnish, Robert (1802-1837). The Anatomy of Drunkenness. 1827. - The Book of Aphorisms. By a Modern Pythagorean [R. M.]. 1834. The Modern Pythagorean, a series of tales, essays and sketches....With the author's life by D. M. Moir. 2 vols. Edinburgh, 1838. Manning, Anne (1807-1879). The Maiden and Married Life of Mary Powell, afterwards Mistress Milton. 1850. The Household of Sir Thomas More. [1851.] - The Colloquies of Edward Osborne, Citizen and Cloth Worker of London, as reported by ye author of Mary Powell. [1852.] - Cherry and Violet, a tale of the great Plague. [1853.] The Old Chelsea Bun House. 1855. - Ladies of Bever Hollow. 1858. - Deborah's Diary. 1859. [Sequel to The Maiden and Married Life of Mary Powell.]XI]

Lesser Novelists

451

Yonge, Charlotte I. Anne Manning. Women Novelists of Queen Victoria's Reign. 1897. Marryat, Frederick. The Naval Officer; or Scenes and Adventures in the Life of Frank Mildnay. 1829. - Peter Simple. 1834. Mr Midshipman Easy. 3 vols. 1836. - Jacob Faithful. 1837. And many other tales. The Novels of Captain Marryat. Ed. by Johnson, R. B. 24 vols. 1896-8. Marryat, Florence. Life and Letters of Captain Marryat. 1872. Moir, David Macbeth. The Life of Mansie Wauch, tailor in Dalkeith, written by himself. [By Moir, D. M.] 1828. With an introduction and notes by Henderson, T. F. [1902.] The Little Library. Illustrated in colour by Hardie, C. M. Edinburgh, 1911. Morier, James Justinian (?1780-1849). The Adventures of Hajji Baba, of Ispahan. 1824. [With an appreciation by Sir Walter Scott.] [1914.] Everyman's Library. - Ayesha, the Maid of Kars. 1834. - bel Allnutt, a novel. 1837. - The Adventures of Tom Spicer, the man who advertised for a wife. 1840. - Martin Toutrond; a Frenchman in London 1831. 1849. Quarterly Review, vol. xxvi, p. 437, 1821-2; vol. xxxix, p. 73, 1829. Owenson, afterwards Morgan, Lady Sydney (?1783-1859). St Clair, or the Heiress of Desmond. 1804. - he Novice of St Dominick. 1805. - he Wild Irish Girl. 1806. - Woman: or, Ida of Athens. 4 vols. 1809. The Life and Times of Salvator Rosa. 2 vols. 1824. - Absenteeism. 1825. The O'Briens and the O'Flaherties; a national tale. 4 vols. 1827. -- The Book of the Boudoir. 2 vols. 1829. - Dramatic Scenes from Real Life. 2 vols. 1833. - Woman and her Master. 2 vols. 1840. Dixon, W. H. (ed.). Lady Morgan's Memoirs: autobiography, diaries and correspondence. 2 vols. 1862. Fitzpatrick, W. J. Lady Morgan; her career, literary and personal. 1860. Paston, George. Little Memoirs of the Nineteenth Century. 1902. Ritchie, Leitch (? 1800-1865). London Night Entertainments. [? 1829.] The Game of Life. 2 vols. 1830. - The Magician. 3 vols. 1836. - Wearyfoot Common. [A tale.] 1855. The New Shilling. [1857.] - inter Evenings. 2 vols. 1859. Payn, J. Some Literary Recollections. 1884. The Times. Jan. 21,1865. Scott, Michael (1789-1835). Tom Cringle's Log. 1836. -- The Cruise of the Midge. 1836. Shelley, Mary Wollstonecraft. Frankenstein, or The Modern Prometheus. 1818. - Valperga: or, the Life and Adventures of Castruccio, Prince of Lucca 1823. - The Last Man. 1826. 29-2452 Bibliography [CH. Shelley, Mary Wollstonecraft. Lodore. 1835. Gilfillan, George. Galleries of literary portraits. Vol. I, p. 301. 2 vols. Edinburgh, 1856. Marshall, Florence A. The Life and Letters of Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley, etc. 1889. Trelawny, Edward John (1792-1881). Adventures of a Younger Son. 3 vols. 1831. With an introduction by Brailsford, H. N. 1914. Bobn's Popular Library. Edgcumbe, R. J. F. Edward Trelawny. A biographical sketch. Plymouth, 1882. Trench, Melesina (1768-1827). Campaspe, an historical Tale, and other poems. Southampton, 1815. - aura's Dream, or the Moonlanders. 1816. -- Mary Queen of Scots, an historical Ballad, and other Poems. [n. d. privately printed.] -Thoughts of a Parent on Education. A new edn, with a preface and notes by the editor. 1837. -- Journal kept during a visit to Germany in 1799-1800. Ed. Trench, R. C. [1861.] Trench, R. C. The Remains of the late Mrs Richard Trench, being selections from her journals, letters, and other papers. 1862. Trollope, Frances. The Vicar of Wrexhill. 3 vols.. 1837. -- The Widow Barnaby. 3 vols. 1839. -The Widow Married; a sequel to the Widow Barnaby. With... illustrations. 3 vols. 1840. -Charles Chesterfield; or, the Adventures of a Youth of Genius [with illustrations by Phiz]. 3 vols. 1841. - The Barnabys in America; or, Adventures of the Widow Wedded. 3 vols. 1843. Frances Trollope, her Life and Literary Work, by [her daughterin-law] Frances Eleanor Trollope. 1895. Ward, Robert Plumer (1765-1846). Tremaine, or the Man of Refinement. 1825.  De Vere, or the Man of Independence. 1827. -- De Clifford, or the Constant Man. 1841. Phipps, E. Memoirs of the political and literary life of R. P. W.... With selections from his correspondence, diaries, and unpublished literary remains. 1850. Warren, Samuel (1807-1877). Passages from the Diary of a Late Physician. With notes and illustrations by the Editor. 3 vols. 1832-8. - Ten Thousand a Year. 3 vols. 1841. [Numerous edns and translations.] - Now and Then. 1848. The Lily and the Bee: An Apologue of the Crystal Palace. 1851. New edn. 1854. - iscellanies, critical, imaginative, and juridical, contributed to Blackwood's Magazine. 1855. - Works. 5 vols. 1854-5. Blackwood's Magazine. September 1877. Warren, S. (of Manchester). Memoirs and select letters of Mrs Anne Warren, with biographical sketches of her family. 1827. Wilson, John Mackay (1804-1835). A Glance at Hinduism. A poem. 1824. - The Enthusiast; a metrical tale, with other pieces, and a preliminary chapter on poetry. Edinburgh, 1834.T7 7T 7. -

-1

xiJ Lesser Ivove Lsts 453 Wilson, John Mackay. Wilson's historical, traditionary, and imaginative Tales of the Borders. 6 vols. Edinburgh, 1835-40. New edn with a Glossary. Revised by Leighton, A. 20 vols. Manchester, 1857-9. Selected and edited, with biographical notice of the contributors, by Tait, James. Edinburgh, 1881. Irving, Joseph. The Book of Scotsmen. 1881. GENERAL LITERATURE Douglas, Sir G. B. S. The Blackwood Group. (Famous Scots series.) [1897.] Elwood, Anne K. Memoirs of the Literary Ladies of England. 2 vols. 1843. Harrison, F. Studies in Early Victorian Literature. 1895. L'Estrange, A. G. The Friendships of Mary Russell Mitford. 1882. Mitford, Mary R. Recollections of a Literary Life. 3 vols. 1852. Saintsbury, George. Essays in English Literature, 1780-1860. 1895. -- History of, Nineteenth Century Literature. 1896. Walker, Hugh. The Literature of the Victorian Era. Cambridge, 1910. Women Novelists of Queen Victoria's Reign. A Book of Appreciations. 1897. [By various hands.] G. A. BROWN. CHAPTER XII THE OXFORD 3IOVEMENT I. GENERAL WORKS Bricknell, W. S. The Judgment of the Bishops upon Tractarian Theology. 1845. Browne, E. G. K. History of the Tractarian Movement. 1856. Church, R. W. The Oxford Movement. Twelve Years, 1833-1845. 1891. Holland, H. S. The Mission of the Oxford Movement in Personal Studies. 1905. [Reprinted from Lyra Apostolica, ed. Beeching, H. C.] Mozley, T. Reminiscences of Oriel College and the Oxford Movement. 2 vols. 1882. Newland, H. G. Three Lectures on Tractarianism. 1852. 4th ed. 1853. Oakeley, F. Historical Notes on the Tractarian Movement, 1833-1845. 1865. Overton, J. H. The Anglican Revival. [1897.] Palmer, William. A Narrative of Events connected with the publication of the Tracts for the Times. 1843. New edn. 1883. Perceval, A. P. A Collection of Papers connected with the Theological Movement of 1833. 1842. 2nd edn. 1842. Thureau-Dangin, Paul. The English Catholic Revival in the Nineteenth Century. Trans. by Wilberforce, Wilfrid. 2 vols. 1915. Ward, Wilfrid. The Oxford Movement. [1913.] II. MAGAZINES The British Magazine founded 1832 by Rose, H. J., and edited by him until 1836, then edited by Maitland, S. R. until its discontinuance in 1849. The British Critic (founded 1793 by Jones, W., of Nayland, and others; a new series began in 1814; became quarterly in 1826). 1836-8 partly edited by Newman, J. H. 1838-41 wholly edited by Newman, J. H. 1841 edited by Mozley, T. to its discontinuance in 1843.T, 7 7~ _ 7!,.

454 lBzblzograp/zy [CH. The Christian Remembrancer 1841-68 edited by Scott, William. In 1844 became quarterly, from which date Mozley, J. B., was co-editor until 1854. The Guardian, founded by Church, R. W., Lord Blachford (Rogers, F.) and Bernard, M., January 1846. III. MISCELLANEOUS BIOGRAPHIES, ETC. Bellasis, Edward. Memorials of Mr Sergeant Bellasis (1800-1873). 1893. 2nd edn (enlarged). 1895. Blachford, Lord. Letters of Frederic, Lord Blachford, edited by Marindin, G. E. 1896. Blomfield, A. A Memoir of Charles James Blomfield, D.D., bishop of London. 2 vols. 1863. Butler, W. J. Life and Letters of William John Butler, late dean of Lincoln and sometime vicar of Wantage. 1897. Lake, Katharine. Memorials of William Charles Lake, dean of Durham (1869-1894). 1901. Moberly, C. A. E. Dulce Domum: George Moberly, his Family and Friends. 1911. Ornsby, R. Memoirs of James Robert Hope-Scott. 2 vols. 1884. Purcell, E. S. and De Lisle, E. Life and Letters of A. P. de Lisle. 2 vols. 1910. Sibthorp, Richard Waldo, Life and Letters of. 1880. Acland, John E. Troyte, Arthur [Acland], A Memoir of. A Layman's Life in the days of the Tractarian Movement. 1904. Watson, Joshua. Memoir of Edward Churton. 2 vols. 1861. IV. THE LIBRARY OF THE FATHERS The Library of the Fathers of the Holy Catholic Church, anterior to the division of the East and West, began in 1838 under the joint editorship of Keble, Newman and Pusey. Marriott, C., became an editor in 1843 until his death in 1857. Forty-eight volumes, the works of thirteen Fathers and ancient writers, were issued between 1838 and 1885. Among these were sixteen volumes of St Chrysostom, twelve of St Augustine, five of St Athanasius and four of St Gregory. Of the prefaces, fifteen were written by Marriott, C., twelve by Pusey, E. B., four by Newman, two by Keble, two by Pusey, P. E., and one each by Liddon, Wilberforce, H. G., and Browne, H. Ten volumes either are without prefaces or their authors are unknown. The translators included some thirty-five scholars, among them Keble, Newman, Pusey, E. B., Church, Keble, T., Prevost, Sir G., Copeland, W. J., Morris, J. B., Macmullen, Pusey, P. E., and Bright, W. A complete list of the Library with the translator and editor of each volume, so far as they are known, is printed as an appendix to ch. XVIII of Liddon's Life of Dr Pusey, vol. I. V. LYRA APOSTOLICA Poems which were originally printed in The British Magazine (edited by Rose, H. J.). Of the one hundred and seventy-nine pieces, Newman wrote one hundred and nine, Keble forty-six, Williams, I., nine, Froude, R. H., eight, Bowden, J. W., six, and Wilberforce, R. I., one. The respectivexII] The Oxford Movement 455 authors signed by Greek letters, thus: a, Bowden, J. W.; P, Froude, R. H.; y, Keble, J.; 8, Newman, J. H.; E, Wilberforce, R. I.; C, Williams, I. 1836. Ed. Holland, P. S., and Beeching, H. C. 1899. VI. PARTICULAR AUTHORS John William Bowden (With Newman, J. H.) St Bartholomew's Eve; a Poem. 1821. Lyra Apostolica. Poems signed a. 1836. Tracts for the Times. Nos. 5, 29, 30, 56, 58. 1833-5. Four Articles in the British Critic. 1836,1837, 1839, 1841. Life of Gregory the Seventh. (2 vols.) 1840. Thoughts on the Work of the Six Days of Creation. (With biographical preface by Newman, J. H.) 1845. John William Burgon The Lives of Twelve Good Men. 2 vols. 1888. New edn. 1 vol. 1891. Many other edns. Goulburn, E. M. Life of Dean Burgon. 2 vols. 1892. Edward Caswall (1814-1878) Lyra Catholica. 1849. Richard William Church Lives of the English Saints. Life of St Wulstan. 1844. Essays and Reviews. Collected from The British Critic and Christian Remembrancer. 1854. Sermons preached before the University of Oxford. 1868. Life of St Anselm. 1870. Civilisation before Christianity. 1872. On some Influences of Christianity on National Character. 1873. Sacred Poetry of Early Religions. 1874. These three, with the University Sermons 1868, were republished in one volume as The Gifts of Civilisation, 1880. The Beginnings of the Middle Ages. 1877. Essay on Dante, republished with a Translation of Dante's De Monarchia, by Church, F. J. 1878. Human Life and its Conditions. 1878. Spenser. (English Men of Letters.) 1879. Bacon. (English Men of Letters.) 1884. Discipline of the Christian Character. 1885. Advent Sermons, 1885. 1886. Miscellaneous Works. 5 vols. 1888. The Oxford Movement. Twelve Years, 1833-1845. 1891. Cathedral and University Sermons. 1892. Village Sermons preached at Whatley. 3 vols. 1892-7. Pascal and other Sermons. 1896. The Message of Peace and other Christmas Sermons. (The second appears with slightly altered title in Cathedral and University Sermons 1892.) 4th edn. 1897. Occasional Papers. 2 vols. 1897. Cecil, A. R.W. W Church. In Six Oxford Thinkers. 1909. Church, Mary C. Life and Letters of Dean Church. 1894. Donaldson, Aug. B. Richard William Church. In Five Great Oxford Leaders. 3rd edn. 1902. Holland, H. S. Richard William Church. Personal Studies. 1905. Lathbury, D.C. Dean Church. 1905.4 56 Bibliography [CH. John Dobree [Bernard] Dalgairns Lives of the English" Saints. 1844-5. Lives of St Aelred, St Waltheof, St Robert, St Helier, St Stephen Harding, St Gilbert, St Bartholomew, and the verse in the Life of St Bettelin. The Devotion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus. 1853. Frequently rptd. The Holy Communion, its Philosophy, Theology, and Practice. 1861. And other works. Aubrey Thomas de Vere Critical Essays. 3 vols. 1887-9. Recollections. 1897. Ward, Wilfrid. Aubrey de Vere; a Memoir. 1904. Digby Mackworth Dolben Poems. Ed. Bridges, R. 1915. Frederick William Faber Works. Prose and Verse. Centenary edn. 11 vols. 1914. Lives of the English Saints. Life of St Wilfrid and Lives of the Northumbrian Saints (St Oswald, St Paulinus, etc.). 1844-5. Tracts on the Church and the Prayer Book. 1839. 2nd series. 1840. Sights and Thoughts in Foreign Churches. 1842. And other works. Life and Letters; ed. Bowden, J. E. 1869. New edn. 1888,1914. Brief Sketch of the early life of F. W. Faber, by Faber, F. A. 1869. Alexander Penrose Forbes (1817-1875) Explanation of the Nicene Creed. 1852. 2nd edn. 1866. The Arbuthnott Missal. Ed (with Forbes, G. H.). 1864. The Thirty-Nine Articles. 2 vols. 1867, 1868. Kalendars of Scottish Saints. 1872. Besides 4 vols. of collected sermons (many published separately), lectures, manuals of devotion and articles in The Edinburgh, Quarterly and North British Reviews and in The Christian Remembrancer. [A list of his works is printed in his Memoir by Mackey, D. J., pp. 219-224.] James Anthony Froude Lives of the English Saints. The Life of St Neot. 1844. Shadows of the Clouds. By Zeta. 1847. The Nemesis of Faith. 1849. 2nd edn. 1849. Richard Hurrell Froude Tracts for the Times. Nos. 9, 59, 63 and possibly part of 35. 1833-5. Lyra Apostolica. Poems signed p. 1836. Remains. Part I. Ed. Keble, J. and Newman, J. H. 2 vols. 1838. Remains. Part II. Ed. Mozley, J. B. Preface by Keble, J. 2 vols. 1839. Guiney, L. I. Hurrell Froude. Memoranda and Comments. 1904. Furlong Elizabeth Skipton Harris From Oxford to Rome. 1847. 2nd edn rev. 1847. 3rd edn. 1847. (Anon.)... By A Companion Traveller. Rest in the Church. (Anon.) By the author of From Oxford to Rome. 1848.XII] The Oxford Movement 457 Walter Farquhar Hook Sermons preached before the University of Oxford. 1837. Hear the Church: a Sermon. 28th edn. 1838. Dictionary of Ecclesiastical Biography. 8 vols. 1842-52. Lives of the Archbishops of Canterbury. 12 vols. 1860-76. Sermons on The Church and Her Ordinances. 2 vols. 1876. Parish Sermons. Ed. Hook, W. 1879. And many other lectures, addresses and treatises. Stephens, W. R. W. Life and Letters of Walter Farquhar Hook, D.D., F.R.S. 1878. 6th and new edn. 1881. John Keble The Christian Year. [Anon.] 2 vols. 1827. 2nd edn. 1827. 3rd edn. 1828. National Apostasy: A Sermon. 1833. Rptd in Sermons Academical and Occasional. Lyra Apostolica. Poems signed y. 1836. Tracts for the Times. Nos. 4, 13, 40, 52, 54, 57, 60. 1834. No. 89. 1841. Primitive Tradition recognised in Holy Scripture. 1836. 2nd edn. 1837. 3rd edn, with postscript and Tract No. 78 as an appendix. 1837. The Case of Catholic Subscription to the XXXIX Articles. Privately printed. 1841. Published. 1865. Lyra Innocentium. (Anon.) 1846. Sermons Academical and Occasional. 1847. 2nd edn. 1848. On Eucharistical Adoration. 1857. 2nd edn. 1859. 3rd edn. 1867. Sermons Occasional and Parochial. 1868. Village Sermons on the Baptismal Service. 1869. Miscellaneous Poems. Ed. Moberly, G. 1869. Letters of Spiritual Counsel. 1870. 3rd and fuller edn. 1875. Sermons for the Christian Year. 11 vols. 1875-80. Occasional Papers and Reviews. With preface by Pusey, E. B. 1877. Studia Sacra. Edited N orris], J. P. 1877. A complete list of Mr Keble's published writings is given in Appendix iI of Lock's John Keble. Coleridge, Sir J. T. Memoir of John Keble. 1869. 2nd edn with corrections etc. 2 vols. 1869. Lock, W. John Keble. 1892. 7th edn. 1895. Shairp, J. C. Studies in Poetry and Philosophy. Edinburgh, 1868, 1872. Wood, Hon. E. John Keble. 1909. Thomas Keble Tracts for the Times. Nos. 12, 22, 43 and 84 (concluded by Prevost, Sir G.). (1833-8.) Plain Sermons by Contributors to the Tracts for the Times. Sermons signed E in vols I, II, iv and x. Alexander Knox (1757-1831) Remains. 4 vols. 1834-7. Correspondence with bishop Jebb. Ed. Forster, C. L. 1834. Henry Parry Liddon Some Words for God. 1865. In the 2nd edn (1866) this title was dropped and Sermons preached before the University of Oxford substituted. Sermons on the Reunion of Christendom. Second series. Sermon viii. Signed L. 1865.458 Bibliography [CH. The Divinity of Our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. (The Bampton Lectures for 1866.) 1867. 14th edn. 1890. Translated into German. Basel, 1883. The Priest in his Inner Life. 1869. Some Elements of Religion. Lent Lectures, 1870. 1872. New edn. 1904. Sermons preached before the University of Oxford. Second Series (1868-79). 1879. 4th edn. 1887. Thoughts on Present Church Troubles. 1881. 2nd edn. 1882. Easter in St Paul's. Sermons. 2 vols. 1885. New edn. 1891. Advent in St Paul's. Sermons. 2 vols. 1888. 2nd edn. 1889. New edn. 1891. Christmastide in St Paul's. Sermons. 1889. The Magnificat. Sermons. 1889. 2nd edn. 1890. Passiontide Sermons. 1891. 2nd edn. 1891. Sermons on Old Testament Subjects. 1891. Sermons on Some Words of Christ. 1892. Essays and Addresses. 1892. Life of Edward Bouverie Pusey, by Liddon, H. P., edited and prepared for publication by Johnston, J. 0. and Wilson, R. J. Vols. I and II. 1893. Vol. III. 1894. 3rd edn. 1895. Vol. iv, edited and prepared for publication by Johnston, J. 0. and Newbolt, W. C. E. 1897. Explanatory Analysis of St Paul's Epistle to the Romans. 1893. 4th edn. 1899. Clerical Life and Work. A collection of Sermons with an Essay. 1894. Explanatory Analysis of St Paul's First Epistle to Timothy. 1897. Sermons preached on Special Occasions, 1860-1889. 1897. Sermons on some Words of St Paul. 1898. A list of Liddon's printed works is given in the appendix to his Life and Letters (1904). Forty-seven of these are sermons published separately between 1858 and 1890. Many of them appear to have been afterwards collected and republished in various volumes. Donaldson, A. B. Henry Parry Liddon. In Five Great Oxford Leaders. 3rd edn. 1902. Holland, H. S. Personal Studies. Henry Parry Liddon and The Life of Henry Parry Liddon. 1905. Johnston, J. O. Life and Letters of Henry Parry Liddon. With a concluding chapter by the bishop of Oxford (Francis Paget). 1904. Russell, G. W. E. Dr Liddon. 1905. Henry Edwtard Cardinal Manning The Unity of the Church. 1842. 2nd edn. 1845. Sermons (4 vols.). 1842-50. Sermons preached before the University of Oxford. 1844. The Temporal Mission of the Holy Ghost. 1865. 4th edn. 1892. Sermons on Ecclesiastical Subjects. 3 vols. 1867-73. Miscellanies. 3 vols. 1877-88. Hutton, A. W. Cardinal Manning. 1892. 2nd edn. 1894. Purcell, E. S. Life of Cardinal Manning. 2 vols. 1896. Charles Marriott Tracts for the Times. No. 78. 1837. Sermons preached before the University and in other places. 1843. Sermons preached in... Oriel College Chapel and other places. 1850.-~~

7 J 7 7 A t

xIIJ hle Uxford IVlovement 459 James Bowling Mlozley Miracles (Bampton Lectures). 1865. 5th edn. 1880. Sermons preached before the University of Oxford and on various occasions. 1876. 4th edn. 1879. Ruling Ideas in Early Ages. 1877. 4th edn. 1889. Essays, Historical and Theological. 2 vols. 1878. 2nd edn. 1884. With an Introductory Memoir [by his sister, Anne Mozley], and at p. xxxix an anonymous Notice [by Church, R. W.] rptd from The Guardian. The Theory of Development: a criticism of Dr Newman's Essay. 1878. [Rptd from The Christian Remembrancer, 1847.] Sermons. Parochial and Occasional. 1879. 2nd edn. 1883. Lectures and other Theological Papers. 1883. Letters of the Rev. J. B. Mozley, D.D., edited by his sister [Anne Mozley]. 1885. Thomas Mozley Reminiscenees, chiefly of Oriel College and the]Oxford Movement. 2 vols. 1882. 2nd edn. 1882. John Mason Neale History of the Holy Eastern Church. 2 vols. 1847. 5 vols. 1873. Essays on Liturgiology. 1863. Collected Hymns, Sequences, and Carols. 1914. Towle, E. A. Memoir. 1906. Neale, J. M. Letters. Edited by his daughter. 1910. A complete chronological list of Neale's works is given in appendix II of his Memoir, 1906. John Henry Cardinal Newman Newman affixed a list of his writings up to 1864 to his History of My Religious Opinions, 1865. This, with additions and alterations, has been reprinted in subsequent editions of his Apologia. A list of his writings is appended to the article in the D. of N. B. on Newman by Lilly, W. S., but that list omits some which are in the list of 1865. From 1868 to 1881, a new and uniform edition of Newman's works was issued in 36 vols.; but this edition did not include all that he had published. His principal works only are given here. St Bartholomew's Eve, in two Cantos. 1821. [With Bowden, J. W. The copy in the British Museum with MS notes by Bloxam, J. R., assigns the separate parts to the respective authors.] The Arians of the Fourth Century. 1833. Tracts for the Times. 6 vols. 1834-41. [For a list of Newman's contributions, see D. of N. B.] Parochial and Plain Sermons (published at various dates between 1834 and 1843). Ed. by Copeland, W. J. 8 vols. 1868. Lectures on the Prophetical Office of the Church, viewed relatively to Romanism and Popular Protestantism. 1837. Republished as vol. I of The Via Media of the Anglican Church. 2 vols. 1877. Lectures on the Doctrine of Justification. 1838. Select Treatises of St Athanasius in Controversy with the Arians. Transl. with Notes and Indices. 2 vols. 1842-4. Sermons preached before the University of Oxford. 1843. Rptd with an additional sermon and a dedication to dean Church, 1871. Sermons bearing on Subjects of the Day. 1843. Subsequent edns slightly altered until that ed. by Copeland, W. J., 1869.460 Bibliography [CH. Lives of the English Saints. Lives of St Gunduleus, St Edelwald, St Bettelin (the prose Life; the verse Life was by Dalgairns, J. D.). 1844-5. Lives of the English Saints, partly ed. by Newman, J. H. 1844-5. New edn. 1900. This series was suggested by Newman, but he ceased to be editor after the first two Lives (1. St Stephen Harding, by Dalgairns, J. D.; 2. The Family of St Richard, by Meyrick, T.) had been published. Of the thirty-one other Lives published, one was by Church, R. W., six by Dalgairns, three by Meyrick, T., two by Pattison, M., nine by Faber, F. W., one each by Coffin, R. A., Ornsby, R., Froude, J. A., Walker, J., and Oakeley, F., two by Barrow, J., and three by Newman, J. H. A list of the authors with the lives ascribed to them is ptd by Hutton, A. W., vol. vI, app. II of the edn of 1900. This is correct except for its ascription of St Ninian (by Barrow, J.) to Froude and St Bartholomew (by Dalgairns) to Mozley, T. A list corrected by cardinal Newman is among the Bloxam MSS at Magd. coll. Oxford. An Essay on the Development of Christian Doctrine. 1845. Loss and Gain. The Story of a Convert. 1848. Discourses addressed to Mixed Congregations. 1849. Lectures on certain Difficulties felt by Anglicans in submitting to the Catholic Church. 1850. The Present Position of Catholics in England. 1851. Verses on Religious Subjects. 1853. [Not all of these are included in the later Verses on Various Occasions.] Sermons preached on Various Occasions. 1854. Two sermons were added to the 3rd edn, 1870, and another to the 4th edn, 1874. Callista: a Sketch of the Third Century. 1856. University Subjects discussed in Occasional Lectures and Essays. 1858. The Scope and Nature of a University Education. 1852. Published later under the title The Idea of a University. New edn. 1903. Apologia pro Vita Sua. 1864. Republished, with the passages dealing with Kingsley, C., omitted, as History of My Religious Opinions. 1865. The original name was adopted for this form of the book in subsequent edns. - Both texts with two appendixes added to the French translation (1866) and with the pamphlets which preceded and evoked the Apologia, with introduction by Ward, Wilfrid. 1913. The Dream of Gerontius. 1866. Verses on Various Occasions. 1868. (Rpts most of Newman's poems in Lyra Apostolica, and The Dream of Gerontius.) An Essay in Aid of a Grammar of Assent. 1870. Two Essays on Miracles. 1, Scripture. 2, Of Ecclesiastical History. 2nd edn. 1870. [The second originally prefixed to a translation of Fleury's Ecclesiastical History (by Christie, Albany), 1843.] Discussions and Arguments on Various Subjects. 1872. [Rpt of various letters and articles, 1841-66.] Essays Critical and Historical. 2 vols. 2nd edn. 1872. [Rptd from The British Critic, 1837-42; and from The Dublin Review, 1846.] Historical Sketches. 3 vols. 1872, 1873. [Rpt of lectures and articles published between 1824 and 1859.] Abbott, E. A. Philomythus. 1891. The Anglican Career of Cardinal Newman. 2 vols. 1892. Barry, W. Newman. 2nd edn. 1904. Blennerhasset (C. J.), Lady. John Henry Kardinal Newman. Berlin, 1904.XII] rThe Oxford Movement 461 Bremond, H. The Mystery of Newman. Transl., Corrance, H. C. Introd., Tyrrell, G. 1907. Cecil, A. J. H. Newman. In Six Oxford Thinkers. 1909. Hutton, R. H. Cardinal Newman. 2nd edn. 1891. Meynell, Wilfrid (under pseudonym 'John Oldcastle'; subsequent editions under his own name). Cardinal Newman. 1890. 6th edn. 1907. Letters and Correspondence of J. H. Newman during his life in the English Church. With a brief autobiography. Ed. Mozley, Anne. 2 vols. 1891. Newman, F. W. Contributions chiefly to the early history of Cardinal Newman. With comments. By his brother, Newman, F. W. 1891. Scott, Thomas (1747-1821). Essays on the most important subjects in Religion. 1793. [See Apologia.] Thureau-Dangin, P. Newman Catholique d'apres des documents nouveaux. Paris, 1912. [A supplement to his La Renaissance Catholique en Angleterre, written after the publication of Wilfrid Ward's Life.] Waller, A. R. and Burrow, G. H. S. John Henry Cardinal Newman. 1901. Ward, Wilfrid. Life of John Henry Cardinal Newman. 2 vols. 1912. Frederick Oakeley Whitehall Chapel Sermons. 1837. Lives of the English Saints. Life of St Augustine of Canterbury. 1844. The Ceremonies of the Mass. 1855. Historical Notes on the Tractarian Movement. 1865. And some thirty-eight other published works, articles in The British Critic, The Dublin Review and The Month. Francis Edzuard Paget Caleb Kniveton. 1833. St Antolins: or Old Churches and New. 1841. The Warden of Berkingholt. 1843. The Owlet of Owlstone Edge. 1856, A Student Penitent of 1695. 1875. And many other works. William Palmer (1811-1879) Harmony of Anglican Doctrine with the Doctrine of the Catholic and Apostolic Church of the East. (Anon.) Aberdeen, 1846. Dissertations on Subjects relating to the Orthodox or Eastern Catholic Communion. 1853. Notes of a Visit to the Russian Church in 1840, 1841. Ed. by Newman, J. H. 1882. Sir William Palmer (1803-1885) Origines Liturgicae. 2 vols. 1832. 4th edn. 1845. Tracts for the Times. No. 15 (revised and completed by Newman, J. H.). 1833. A Treatise on the Church of Christ. 2 vols. 1838. 3rd edn. 1842. Letters to N. Wiseman, D.D. 1842. A new edn. 1851. A Narrative of Events connected with the Publication of the Tracts for the Times. 1843. New edn. 1883. Arthur Philip Perceval Tracts for the Times. Nos. 23, 35 (with Froude, R. H.), 36, and possibly 17. A Vindication of the Authors of the Tracts for the Times. 2nd edn. 1841. A Collection of Papers connected with the Theological Movement of 1833. 1842. 2nd edn. 1842.462 Bibiography [CH. John Hungerford Pollen Letter to the Parishioners of St Saviour's, Leeds. 1851. Narrative of Five Years at St Saviour's, Leeds. 1851. Pollen, Anne. John Hungerford Pollen, 1820-1902. 1912. [A list of the writings of Pollen, J. H., is given on pp. 377, 378.] Edward Bouverie Pusey Tracts for the Times. Nos. 18, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 77, 81; possibly 76. 1834-7. Letter to the Archbishop of Canterbury. 3rd edn with notes. 1842. A Letter to the Bishop of London. 1851. 7th edn. 1851. Parochial Sermons. Vol. i. 1852. Vol. II. 1853. Vol. In. 1873. The Doctrine of the Real Presence. 1855. The Real Presence. 1857. Sermons Preached before the University of Oxford. 1859-80. What is of Faith as to Everlasting Punishment? 1880. The Minor Prophets. 1860. Daniel the Prophet. 1864. Eirenicon. Part I. 1865. Part II, 1st Letter to Dr Newman. 1869. Part III, Is Heathful Reunion Impossible? 1870. Historical Preface to Tract No. 90. 1865. Lenten Sermons. 1874. Parochial and Cathedral Sermons. 1882. Liddon, H. P., D.D. Life of E. B. Pusey, D.D. Ed. Johnston, J. O., Wilson, R. J., and Newbolt, W. E. 4 vols. 1893-7. A complete bibliography of Pusey's printed works (by Madan, F.) is given as appendix A in vol. iv of his Life by Liddon. Hugh James Rose Discourses on the state of the Protestant Religion in Germany. 1825. 2nd edn. 1829. [In reply to E. B. Pusey's Historical enquiry into... the Theology of Germany, 1828.] Martin Joseph Routh Reliquiae sacrae sive auctorum fere jam perditorum secundi tertiique seculi post Christum natum quae supersunt. Vols. I-iv. 1814-18. 2nd edn. 1846-8. Vol. v. 1848. Scriptorum ecclesiasticorum opuscula praecipua quaedam. 2 vols. 1832. 2nd edn. 1840. Re-ed. [anonymously] by Jacobson, W. 1858. Tres breves Tractatus. 1853. Elizabeth Missing Sewell Amy Herbert. 1844. Many times reprinted. The Experience of Life. 1852. Ursula. 1858. And six other stories published between 1847 and 1868. Sewell, E. L. (ed.) Autobiography of Elizabeth M. Sewell. 1907. William Sewell The Plea of Conscience for seceding etc. 1845. 3rd edn. 1845. A Year's Sermons to Boys. 2 vols. 1854-69.XII]

TAhe Oxford Movement

463

Richard Chenevix Trench The Study of Words. 1851. 9th edn. 1859. 19th edn. 1886. On the Lessons in Proverbs. 1853. 3rd edn. 1854. 7th edn. 1888. English Past and Present. 1855. 14th edn (in part re-written by Mayhew, A.L.). 1889. Poems. 1865. 9th edn. 1888. And many other works. [Trench, M.] Letters and Memorials of Archbishop Trench. 2 vols. 1888. William George Ward The Ideal of a Christian Church considered in comparison with Existing Practice. 1844. 2nd edn. 1844. Edited The Dublin Review, 1863-78. Ward, Wilfrid. William George Ward and the Oxford Movement. 1889. - illiam George Ward and the Catholic Revival. 1893. Henry William Wilberforce Reasons for submitting to the Catholic Church: a Farewell Letter. 1851. 6th edn. 1855. The Church and the Empires. 1874. With a memoir by J. H. Newman. Owned and edited The Catholic Standard (later The Weekly Register), 1854-63. Robert Isaac Wilberforce Lyra Apostolica. Poem lettered E. 1836. The Doctrine of the Incarnation of Our Lord Jesus Christ. 1848. The Doctrine of Holy Baptism. 1849. The Doctrine of the Holy Eucharist. 1853. An Inquiry into the Principles of Church Authority. 1854. Isaac Williams Lyra Apostolica. Poems lettered S. 1836. Tracts for the Times. Tracts Nos. 80, 86 and 87. 1837, 1838 and 1839 respectively. The Cathedral. Poems. 1838. 8th edn. 1859. Ed. Benham, W. 1889. Thoughts in Past Years. Poems. 1838. 6th edn enlarged. 1852. The Altar. Poems. (Anon.) 1847. Another edn. 1849. The Christian Scholar. Poems. 1849. The Seven Days. Poems. 1850. The Christian Seasons. (Poems.) 1854. Williams, I. Autobiography. Edited by Sir George Prevost. 1892. 3rd edn. 1893. Nicholas Patrick Stephen Cardinal Wiseman Lectures on the Doctrines and Practices of the Catholic Church. 1836. High Church Claims. 1841. Essays (collected) on Various Subjects. 3 vols. 1853. New edn, with biographical introd. 1888. Fabiola. A Tale of the Catacombs. 1854. Recollections of the last four Popes and of Rome in their times. 1858. Ward, W. Life of Cardinal Wiseman. 2,vols. 1897. CANON S. L. OLLARD.464

Bibliography

[CH.

CHAPTER XIII THE GROWTH OF LIBERAL THEOLOGY A. GENERAL WORKS Benn, A. W. The History of English Rationalism in the Nineteenth Century. 1906. Conybeare, W. J. Article on Church Parties. Edinburgh Review. 1853. [This contains the first literary use of the term 'Broad Church.' See New English Dictionary, s.v.'Broad,' and Storr's Development of English Theology, p. 351, note.] Cornish, F. W. Warre. History of the English Church in the Nineteenth Century. 1910. Fairbairn, A. M. Christ in Modern Theology. 1893. Hunt, J. Religious Thought in England in the Nineteenth Century. 1896. Lecky, W. E. H. History of Rationalism in Europe. 1865. Overton, J. H. The English Church in the Nineteenth Century, 1800-1833. 1894. Rashdall, H. Doctrine and Development. 1898. Robertson, J. M. A Short History of Freethought. 1906. Stephen, Sir Leslie. History of English Thought in the Eighteenth Century. 2 vols. 1876. Storr, V. F. The Development of English Thought in the Nineteenth Century, 1800-1860. 1913. [The fullest recent study of this period.] Stoughton, J. History of Religion in England. Vols. vII and vIII. 1884. Tuckwell, W. Pre-Tractarian Oxford: a Reminiscence of the Oriel Noetics. 1909. Tulloch, J. Movements of Religious Thought in Britain during the Nineteenth Century. 1885. Vaughan, J. Scottish Influence upon English Theological Thought. In The Contemporary Review. June 1878. White, A. D. A History of the Warfare of Science with Theology. 1896. B. PARTICULAR WORKS (A representative, not an exhaustive, list.) Arnold, Thomas. The Christian Duty of conceding the Claims of the Roman Catholics. Oxford, 1829. Sermons. 3 vols. 1829-34. - Principles of Church Reform. 1833. - Two Sermons on the Interpretation of Prophecy, with Notes. 1839. - Christian Life, its Course, etc. Sermons. 1841. - Christian Life, its Hopes, etc. Sermons. 1842. - Sermons, chiefly on the Interpretation of Scripture. 1845. - Miscellaneous Works. 1845. - ife and Correspondence of. Ed. Stanley, A. P. 1844. - Essay on. In Essays Historical and Theological by Mozley, J. B. 1878. - he Theology of. By Neander, J. A. W. English translation. 1846. See, also, bibliography to chapter xIv, post.xIII] TAe Growth of Liberal Theology 465 Aspland, Robert (1782-1845). Reflections upon the liberal spirit of the Apostles. Harlow, 1805. - auses of the slow progress of Christian truth. 1825. Sermons on various subjects. 1847. - emoirs of the Life, Works, and Correspondence of, by Aspland, R. B. 1850. Belsham, Thomas (1750-1829). Discourses, doctrinal and practical. 2 vols. 1826-7. Bray, Charles (1811-1884). The Philosophy of Necessity. 1841. 2nd edn, largely rewritten. 1861. Christianity viewed in the light of our present knowledge and moral sense. 1876. - Phases of Opinion and Experience during a long life. 1884. Bruce, Alexander Balmain (1831-1899). The Training of the Twelve. 1871.  The Chief End of Revelation. 1881. - The Parabolic Teaching of Christ. 1882. - he Kingdom of God. 1889. - St Paul's Conception of Christianity. 1894. -The Providential Order of the World. 1897. - The Moral Order of the World. 1899. Caird, John (1820-1898). Fundamental Ideas of Christianity. With a Memoir by Caird, E. 1900. Campbell, John McLeod. The whole Proceedings in the Case of the Rev. John McLeod Campbell. 1831. Sermons and Lectures. 1832. -- The Nature of the Atonement. 1856. - Thoughts on Revelation. 1862. - Reminiscences and Reflections. 1873. - Memorials of, ed. by Campbell, Donald. 1877. Cassels, Walter Richard (1826-1907). Supernatural Religion. Vols. I and II. 1874. Vol. In. 1877. [Anonymous.] Chambers, Robert (1802-1871). Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation. [Anonymous.] 1844. Cheyne, Thomas Kelly (1841-1915). The Prophecies of Isaiah. 2 vols. 1880-1. The Origin and Religious Contents of the Psalter. 1891. - Founders of Old Testament Criticism. 1894. - (Joint editor) Encyclopaedia Biblica. 1899-1903. Colenso, John William, bishop of Natal. Sermons. [Dedicated to F. D. Maurice.] 1853. The Epistle to the Romans, newly translated and explained from a missionary point of view. 1861. The Pentateuch and Book of Joshua criticallyexamined. 7 parts. 1862-79. - The Life of, by Cox, [Sir] G. W. 2 vols. 1888. Coleridge, Samuel Taylor. F. J. A. Hort's essay on. In Cambridge Essays. 1856. - J. Martineau on. In Essays, Reviews and Addresses. Vol. I. See, also, bibliography to chap. vi, vol. xI. Cox, Samuel (1826-93). Salvator Mundi. 1877. Dale, Robert William (1829-1895). The Atonement. 1875. The Living Christ and the Four Gospels. 1890. - The Life of, by Dale, A. W. W. 1898.

E. L. XII.

30466 Bibliography [CH. Davidson, Samuel (1806-1898). Lectures on Biblical Criticism. Edinburgh, 1839. Rewritten as A Treatise on Biblical Criticism. 1852. - Introduction to the New Testament. 3 vols. 1848-51. - The Text of the Old Testament considered... with a brief Introduction. 1856. [This publication led to a long controversy, and to Davidson's resignation of his professorship in the Lancashire Independent College.] - An Introduction to the Old Testament. 3 vols. 1862-3. The Canon of the Bible. 1877. The Doctrine of the Last Things. 1882. Autobiography and Diary of, with an Account of the Davidson controversy of 1857, by Picton, J. Allanson. 1899. Davison, John (1777-1834). Discourses on Prophecy. 1824. An Inquiry into the Origin and Intent of Primitive Sacrifice. 1825. Remains and Occasional Publications. 1840. Driver, Samuel Rolles (1846-1914). An Introduction to the Literature of the Old Testament. 1897. Drummond, Henry (1851-1897). Natural Law in the Spiritual World. 1883. The Ascent of Man. 1894. Erskine, Thomas, of Linlathen. Remarks on the Internal Evidence for the Truth of Revealed Religion. 1820. French tr. 1822. German tr. 1825. An Essay on Faith. 1822. The Unconditional Freeness of the Gospel. 1828. New edn. 1870. - The Brazen Serpent, or Life coming through Death. 1831. 2nd edn. 1846. The Doctrine of Election. 1837. The Spiritual Order, and other Papers. Edinburgh, 1871. [Posthumous.] True and False Religion. 1874. - Letters of, ed. Hanna, W. 2 vols. 1877. See, also, Shairp, J. C., Studies in Poetry and Philosophy, 4th edn, Edinburgh, 1886; and the writings of Scott, A. J. (1805-1866). Essays and Reviews. (Temple, F., Williams, Rowland, Powell, Baden, Wilson, H. B., Goodwin, C. W., Pattison, Mark, Jowett, B.) 1860. Ewing, Alexander (1814-1873), bishop of Argyll. Present Day Papers. [By himself, Maurice, F. D., Erskine, T., Myers, F. etc.] 1869-74. - Revelation considered as Light. 1873. Farrar, Frederic William (1831-1903). The Life of Christ. 1874. Eternal Hope. 1878. Fellowes, Robert (1771-1847). (= Philalethes, A.. Oxon.) A Picture of Christian Philosophy, or... Illustration of the character of Jesus. 1798. Religion without Cant. 1801. The Religion of the Universe. 1836. Foster, John (1770-1843). Essays. 2 vols. 1805. Contributions, Biographical, Literary, and Philosophical, to the Eclectic Review. 2 vols. 1844. Life and Correspondence of, ed. Ryland, J. E. 2 vols. 1846. Fox, William Johnson (1786-1864). Religious Ideas. 1849. - Memorial edition of Collected Works. 12 vols. 1865-8. Frend, William (1757-1841). Six Tracts in Vindication of the Worship of One God. 1789. Thoughts on Subscription to religious Tests. 1789. Peace and Union recommended. 1793.XIII] The Growth of Liberal Theology 467 Frend, William. An Account of the Proceedings in the University of Cambridge against William Frend. 1793. A Sequel to the Account. 1795. Geddes, Alexander (1737-1802). The Holy Bible... faithfully translated... with critical remarks. Vol. I. 1792. Vol. II. 1797. - Critical Remarks on the Hebrew Scriptures. 1800. Green, Thomas Hill (1836-1882). The Witness of God, and Faith. Two Lay Sermons. 1883. Collected Works, ed. Nettleship, R. L. 1885-8. Greg, William Rathbone (1809-1881). The Creed of Christendom: its foundations and superstructure. 1851. Enigmas of Life. 1872. Hampden, Renn Dickson (1793-1868), bishop of Hereford. An Essay on the Philosophical Evidence of Christianity. 1827. The Scholastic Philosophy considered in its relation to Christian Theology. Bampton Lectures. 1833. -Observations on Religious Dissent. 1834. A Lecture on Tradition. 1839. Sermons preached before the University of Oxford. 1848. - The Fathers of Greek Philosophy. 1862. Some Memorials of, by his daughter, Hampden, Henrietta. 1871. Hare, Augustus William (1792-1834). The Alton Sermons. 2 vols. 1837. - (with his brother Julius). Guesses at Truth, by two Brothers. 1827. Hare, Julius Charles (1795-1855). The Victory of Faith. 1840. 3rd edn, with introductory notices by Maurice, F. D. and Stanley, A. P. 1874. Sermons preacht in Herstmonceux Church. 2 vols. 1841-9. - The Mission of the Comforter. 2 vols. 1846. - John Sterling, Essays and Tales, with Memoir. 1848. Hatch, Edwin (1835-1889). The Organisation of the early Christian Churches. Bampton Lectures. 1881. Translated into German by Harnack, A., 1883. - The Growth of Church Institutions. 1887. - Greek Influence on Christianity, ed. Fairbairn, A. I. 1890. Heber, Reginald (1783-1826), bishop of Calcutta. The Personality and Office of the Christian Comforter. Bampton Lectures. 1816. Hennell, Charles Christian (1809-1850). An Inquiry concerning the Origin of Christianity. 1838. German translation, with preface by Strauss, 1839. - Christian Theism. 1839. Hinton, James (1822-1875). The Mystery of Pain. 1866 ff. - Philosophy and Religion. 1881. - The Law Breakers and the Coming of the Law. 1884. The Life and Letters of, ed. Hopkins, Ellice. 1878. 4th edn. 1882. Horne, George (1730-1792), bishop of Norwich. Commentary on the Psalms. 1776. Hort, Fenton John Anthony (1828-1892). Two Dissertations. 1876. (with Westcott, B. F.). The New Testament in the Original Greek. The Text revised. (The Introduction entirely by Hort.) 1881. The Way The Truth The Life. (Hulsean Lectures, 1871.) 1893. Judaistic Christianity. 1894. The Christian Ecclesia. 1897. Hutton, Richard Holt (1826-1897). Essays, Theological and Literary. 2 vols. 1871. - Essays on some of the modern Guides of English Thought in matters of Faith. 1887. - Aspects of Religious and Scientific Thought. 1899. 30-2468 Bibliography [CH. Jortin, John (1698-1770). Remarks on Ecclesiastical History. 1751-4. - The Life of Erasmus. 1758. 2nd vol. 1760. Sermons and Charges. 7 vols. 1771-2. Jowett, Benjamin (1817-1893). St Paul's Epistles to the Thessalonians, Galatians, and Romans. Commentary with Essays and Dissertations. 2 vols. 1855. 3rd edn by Campbell, Lewis. 1894. - College Sermons, ed. Fremantle, W. H. 1895. Sermons, Biographical and Miscellaneous. 1899. Sermons on Faith and Doctrine. 1901. - Select passages from the Theological Writings of. [Includes some hitherto unprinted fragments.] 1902. See, also, post, bibliography to chapter xv, and Stephen, Leslie, Studies of a Biographer, vol. II, 1898. Kingsley, Charles (1819-1875). Sermons on National Subjects. 2 Series. 1852-4. - Sermons for the Times. 1855. Town and Country Sermons. 1861. - What, then, does Dr Newman mean? [This produced Newman's Apologia.] 1864. - Westminster Sermons. 1874. Letters and Memoirs of the Life of, by his Wife. 2 vols. 1877. See, also, bibliography in volume xIII. Lightfoot, Joseph Barber (1828-1889), bishop of Durham. Recent editions of St Paul's Epistles. In Journal of Classical and Sacred Philology. March, 1856. [Deals chiefly with Stanley's and Jowett's editions.] St Paul's Epistle to the Galatians. 1865. - St Paul's Epistle to the Philippians. 1868. St Paul's Epistles to the Colossians and to Philemon. 1875. - Essays on the Work entitled 'Supernatural Religion.' 1889. - The Apostolic Fathers. Part I (Clement). 1869-77. 2nd edn. 1890. Part II (Ignatius, Polycarp). 1885. 2nd edn. 1889. Lowth, Robert (1710-1787), bishop of London. Praelectiones de Sacra Poesi Hebraeorum. 1753. Translated into English by Gregory, as Lectures on Hebrew Poetry, with notes by Michaelis, J. D. 1793. German translation, 1793. Mackay, Robert William (1803-1882). The Progress of the Intellect, as exemplified in the Religious Development of the Greeks and Hebrews. 2 vols. 1850. - A Sketch of the Rise and Progress of Christianity. 1854. - The Tiibingen School and its Antecedents. 1863. Marsh, Herbert (1757-1839), bishop of Peterborough. A dissertation on the origin and composition of our three first canonical Gospels. 1801. Martineau, James (1805-1900), Types of Ethical Theory. 2 vols. 1885. -- A Study of Religion. 2 vols. 1888. - The Seat of Authority in Religion. 1890. Essays, Reviews and Addresses. 4 vols. 1890-1. - Life and Letters, by Drummond, J. and Upton, C. B. 1902. - James Martineau, Theologian and Preacher, by Carpenter, J. Estlin. 1905. Maurice, John Frederick Denison (1805-1872). The Kingdom of Christ. 1838. - The Religions of the World. 1847. - Theological Essays. 1853. 2nd edn, with new preface and concluding essay. 1854.xIII] 7hie GrowtA of Liberal Theology 469 Maurice, John Frederick Denison. The Doctrine of Sacrifice. 1854. - The Epistles of St John: Lectures on Christian Ethics. 1857. - What is Revelation? [With letters on Mansel's Bampton Lectures.] 1859. - The Gospel of the Kingdom of Heaven. 1864. - The Conscience, Lectures on Casuistry. 1868. - Social Morality. 1869. - Moral and Metaphysical Philosophy. 1871-2. -Life of, chiefly told in his own Letters, ed. Maurice, Frederick. 1884. Life of, by Masterman, C. F. G. 1907. Milligan, William (1821-1893). Art. in Encyclopaedia Britannica on The Epistle to the Ephesians. 1879. Milman, Henry Hart. See bibliography to chapter xiv, post. Mivart, St George (1827-1900). Scripture and Roman Catholicism. In The Nineteenth Century. March 1900. Momerie, Alfred Williams (1848-1900). The Origin of Evil. 1881. Myers, Frederic (1811-1851). Catholic Thoughts on the Church of Christ and the Church of England. (Present-Day Papers, ed. Ewing, bp A.) 1874. [Printed privately and anonymously from 1834.] Catholic Thoughts on the Bible and Theology. 1874. [First printed 1841.] Newman, Francis William (1805-1897). A History of the Hebrew Monarchy. 1847. - The Soul, her Sorrows and her Aspirations. 1849. New edn, with memoir by Upton, C. B. 1905. - hases of Faith. 1850. Theism, Doctrinal and Practical. 1858. - emoir and Letters of, by Sieveking, L. G. 1909. Pattison, Mark (1813-1884). Sermons. 1885. Memoirs. 1885. Essays, collected by Nettleship, H. 2 vols. 1889. Powell, Baden (1796-1860). Rational Religion examined. 1826. - Revelation and Science. 1833. - The connexion of Natural and Divine Truth. 1838. - Tradition Unveiled. 1839. A Supplement. 1840. - The Unity of Worlds. 1855. - The Study of Natural Theology. 1856. - Christianity without Judaism. 1857. - The Evidences of Natural Theology. In Oxford Essays. 1857. - The Order of Nature. 1859. Robertson, Frederick William (1816-1853). Sermons preached at Trinity Chapel, Brighton. Series 1-4. 1855-63. Series 5. 1874. - Lectures and Addresses. 1858. With additions. 1876. - Expository Lectures on St Paul's Epistles to the Corinthians. 1859. - Life and Letters, by Brooke, Stopford A. 1865. Seeley, Sir John Robert. Ecce Homo. [Anonymous.] 1865. - Natural Religion. By the author of Ecce Homo. 1882. Sidgwick, Henry (1838-1900). The Ethics of Conformity and Subscription. 1871. Smith, John Pye (1774-1851). The Relation between the Holy Scriptures and some parts of Geological Science. 1839. Smith, William Henry (1808-1872). Thorndale, or the Conflict of Opinions. 1857.470 Bibliography [CH. Smith, William Henry. Gravenhurst, or Thoughts on Good and Evil. 1861. 2nd edn, with Memoir. 1875. Smith, William Robertson (1846-1894). Biblical articles in the Encyclopaedia Britannica, 9th edn. 1875-81. The Old Testament in the Jewish Church. 1881. The Prophets of Israel. 1882. The Religion of the Semites: Fundamental Institutions. 1889. -Lectures and Essays, edd. Black, J. S. and Chrystal, George. 1912. - Life of, by Black, J. S. and Chrystal, George. 1912. Stanley, Arthur Penrhyn (1815-1881). Sermons and Essays on the Apostolic Age. 1847. - The Epistles of St Paul to the Corinthians. 1855. Essays, chiefly on Questions of Church and State. 1870. - Christian Institutions. 1881. Recollections of, by Bradley, G. G. 1883. -- Life and Correspondence, by Prothero, R. E. 1893. See, also, bibliography to chapter xiv, post. Taylor, Isaac (1787-1865). The Natural History of Enthusiasm. 1829. Spiritual Christianity. 1841. The Restoration of Belief. [Anonymous., 1855. The Spirit of Hebrew Poetry. 1861. Thirlwall, Connop (1797-1875), bishop of St David's. A Critical Essay on the Gospel of St Luke, by Schleiermacher, F. 1825. See, also, bibliography to chapter xiv, post. Tyrrell, George (1861-1909). Nova et Vetera: Informal Meditations. 1897. -Hard Sayings. 1898. - External Religion: its use and abuse. 1899. The Faith of the Millions: Essays. 1st and 2nd Series. 1901. - Lex Orandi: or, Prayer and Creed. 1903. Lex Credendi: a Sequel to Lex Orandi. 1906. A Much-abused Letter. 1906. -Oil and Wine. Privately printed, 1902. Reissue, 1907. - Through Scylla and Charybdis. 1907. Medievalism: a Reply to Cardinal Mercier. 1908. - Christianity at the Cross-Roads. 1909. - Medievalism. Third Impression, with additions. 1909. Versions and Perversions of Heine and others. 1909. - The Church and the Future. Privately printed, 1903. Reissue, 1910. -Essays on Faith and Immortality, arranged by Petre, M. D. 1914. - Autobiography and Life, arranged by Petre, M. D. 1912. Vaughan, Robert Alfred (1823-1857). Hours with the Mystics. 1856. Wakefield, Gilbert (1756-1801). Silva Critica. 1789-95. Westcott, Brooke Foss (1825-1901). The Canon of the New Testament. 1855. Introduction to the Study of the Gospels. 1860. - Social Aspects of Christianity. 1887. See, also, s.v. Hort. Whately, Richard (1787-1863), archbishop of Dublin. Historic Doubts relative to Napoleon Buonaparte. [Anonymous.] 1819. The Use and Abuse of Party Feeling in Matters of Religion. 1822. - Essays on some Peculiarities of the Christian Religion. 1825. - Letters on the Church. By an Episcopalian. 1826.xIII] The Growth of Liberal Theology

47

Whately, Richard. The Kingdom of Christ delineated. 1841. - Life and Correspondence, ed. Whately, E. J. 1866. White, Joseph Blanco (1775-1841). Second Travels of an Irish Gentleman in search of a Religion. 1833. Life, written by himself, ed. Thom, J. H. 3 vols. 1845. Williams, Rowland (1817-1870). Rational Godliness. 1855. Christianity and Hinduism. 1856. - Hebrew Prophets. Vol. i. 1866. Vol. II. 1871. Broadchalke Sermon-Essays. 1867. - Psalms and Litanies. 1872. Life and Letters, ed. by his Wife. 1874. Wilson, Henry Bristow (1803-1888). The Communion of the Saints. Bampton Lectures. 1851. - Schemes of Christian Comprehension, in Oxford Essays. 1857. Winchester, Elhanan. The Universal Restoration. 1788. - The Restitution of all things. 1790. - Defence of Revelation, in 10 letters to Thomas Paine. 1796. C. EVANGELICALS AND SOME OTHERS Abbey, C. J. and Overton, J. H. The English Church in the Eighteenth Century. 1878. Balleine, G. R. A History of the Evangelical Party. 1908. Dale, R. W. The Evangelical Revival. 1880. Ryle, J. C. Christian Leaders of the Last Century. 1869. Seeley, Mary. The later Evangelical Fathers. 1879. 2nd edn. 1914. Stephen, Sir James. Essays in Ecclesiastical Biography. 1849. Stock, Eugene. History of the Church Missionary Society. 3 vols. 1899. Venn, J. Annals of a Clerical Family. 1904. Adam, Thos. of Winteringham (1701-1784). Evangelical Sermons. 1781. - osthumous Works. 3 vols. 1786. Private Thoughts on Religion. 1795. [A selection from Posthumous Works, which has been frequently reprinted and translated into many languages. Coleridge's copy, much marked, is in the Brit. Mus.] Bickersteth, Edward (1786-1850). Christian Psalmody. 1833. [One of the earliest Church hymn-books, it formed the basis of E. H. Bickersteth's Hymnal Companion.] Collected Works. 16 vols. 1853. Birks, Thomas Rawson (1810-1883). The Bible and Modern Thought. 1861. - odern Physical Fatalism. 1876. New edn, with preface by Pritchard, Charles. 1882. Blunt, Henry (1794-1843). Lectures on the Life of Jacob. 15 edns between 1828 and 1840. Lectures on St Peter. 16 edns between 1829 and 1842. - Lectures on Abraham. 11 edns between 1831 and 1844. The Poor Churchman's Evening Companion. [The first parish magazine. D. of N. B., s.v. Blunt, H.] Bonar, Horatius (1808-1889). God's Way of Peace. 1862. And other works. Candlish, Robert Smith (1806-1873). Examination of Mr Maurice's Theological Essays. 1854. And other works. Cecil, Richard (1748-1810). Remains, ed. Pratt, Josiah. 1810. Collected Works, ed. Pratt, Josiah. 4 vols. 1811.4 7 2 Bibliography [CH. Chalmers, Thomas (1780-1847). Astronomical Discourses. 1817. Commercial Discourses. 1817. - orks. 23 vols. 1836-42. Memoirs of, by Hanna, XV. 4 vols. 1849-52. - Galleries of literary portraits. Gilfillan, G. Vol. II. 1857. Close, Francis (1797-1882). Miscellaneous Sermons. 1834. The Stage, ancient and modern: its tendencies on Morals and Religion. 1877. Conybeare, William John (1815-1857) and Howson, John Saul (1816-1885). The Life and Epistles of St Paul. 1851. Dawson, George (1821-1876). Sermons. 4 vols. 1878-82. See D. of N. B., also Gilfillan, G., Galleries of literary portraits, vol. II, 1857. Gisborne, Thomas (1758-1846). Collected works. 9 vols. 1813. I nquiry concerning Love as one of the Divine Attributes. 1838. Goode, William (1801-1868). The Divine Rule of Faith and Practice. 1842. - Infant Baptism. 1849. - he Nature of Christ's Presence in the Eucharist. 1856. Guthrie, Thomas (1803-1873). The Gospel in Ezekiel. 1855. Hall, Robert (1764-1831). Works, with an Essay by Foster, John. 6 vols. 1832. See, also, Gilfillan, G., Galleries of literary portraits, vol. II, 1857. Hill, Rowland (1744-1833). Village Dialogues. 1810. Horne, Thomas Hartwell (1780-1862). An Introduction to the Critical Study of the Scriptures. 1818. 11th edn. 1860. Irving, Edward (1792-1834). Collected Writings, ed. Carlyle, G. 1864-5. See, also, Gilfillan, G., Galleries of literary portraits, vol. II, 1857. Kitto, John (1804-1854). The Pictorial Bible. 1838. Litton, Edward Arthur. The Church of Christ. 1851. - An Introduction to Dogmatic Theology. 1882. Macleod, Norman (1812-1872). Contributions to the Christian Instructor and to Good Words, 1849 ff. - Reminiscences of a Highland Parish. 1867. See, also, the Memoir by Macleod, D., 2 vols., 1876. Macmillan, Hugh (1833-1903). Bible Teaching in Nature. 1867. - The Ministry of Nature. 1871. Melvill, Henry (1798-1871). Sermons preached before the University of Cambridge. 1836. - The Golden Lectures, 1850-1855. 6 vols. 1856. Milner, Joseph (1744-1797). The History of the Church of Christ. Vols. I II. 1794-7. Revised by his brother Isaac (1750-1820), and continued: vol. Iv, 1803; vol. v, 1809. All five vols re-edited by Isaac Milner. 1816. - Practical Sermons. Vol I, with Memoir by Isaac Mlilner. 1800. Other volumes in 1809, 1823, 1830. Monro, Edward (1815-1866). View of Parochial Life. 1851. Noel, hon. Baptist Wriothesley (1789-1873). Essay on the Union of Church and State. 1848. Overton, John (1763-1838). The True Churchmen Ascertained. 1801. Richmond, Legh (1772-1827). The Annals of the Poor. 1814. - Life of, by Grimshawe, T. S. 1828. Rogers, Henry (1806-1877). The Eclipse of Faith, or a Visit to a Religious Sceptic. 1852.XIII] The Growth of Liberal 7Theology 473 Rogers, Henry. Essays on some Theological Controversies, chiefly contributed to the Edinburgh Review. 1874. [Rearranged from previous volumes of Essays, 1850-5.] Romaine, William (1714-1795). The Life of Faith. 1763. The Walk of Faith. 1771. - The Triumph of Faith. 1795. Works and Life, ed. Cadogan, W. B. 8 vols. 1809. Ryle, John Charles (1816-1900), bishop of Liverpool. Expository Thoughts on the Gospels. 1856. Scholefield, James (1789-1853). Discourses. 1840. Scott, Thomas (1747-1821). The Force of Truth. 1779. [Revised by Cowper. A piece of spiritual autobiography.] - The Holy Bible, with explanatory Notes. 4 vols. 1788-92. - Theological Works. 5 vols. 1805-8. Also 10 vols. 1823-5. Life, by Downer, A. C. 1909. Seeley, Robert Benton (1798-1886). Essays on the Church. 1834. Sharp, Granville (1735-1813). Remarks on the uses of the Definitive Article in the New Testament. 1798. A Dissertation on the Supreme Divine Dignity of the Messiah. 1806. - Memoirs, by Hoare, Prince. 1820. Simeon, Charles (1759-1836). The Danger of neglecting the Great Sacrifice. 1797. An Appeal to Men of Wisdom and Candour. Four Discourses. 1810. Horae Homileticae. A long series of volumes, beginning from 1796. Collected in 11 vols. 1819-20. An appendix of 6 vols. 1828. Complete Works. 21 vols. 1840. - Memoirs, by Carus, William. 1847. - - by Moule, H. C. G. 1892. Smith, W. A. 'Shepherd' Smith [Smith, J. E., 1801-1857] the Universalist. 1892. Spurgeon, Charles Haddon (1834-1892). The Treasury of David. 1870-85. Stoughton, John. Religion in England, 1800-1880. 2 vols. 1884. Sumner, John Bird (1780-1862), archbishop of Canterbury. The Evidence of Christianity derived from its Nature and Reception. 1824. Practical Expositions of the New Testament. 1831-51. Thornton, Henry (1760-1815). Family Commentaries, ed. Inglis, Sir R. H. 1835-7. Venn, Henry (1725-97). The Compleat Duty of Man. 1763. - Life and Letters, by Venn, Henry (1796-1873). 1834. Yogan, Thomas Stuart Lyle. The True Doctrine of the Eucharist. 1849. Waldegrave, hon. Samuel (1817-1869), bishop of Carlisle. New Testament Millenarianism. Bampton Lectures. 1855. Wilberforce, Samuel (1805-1873). Agathos. 1840 ff. Wilberforce, William (1759-1833). A Practical View of the Prevailing Religious System of Professed Christians. 1797. Life, by his sons Robert Isaac and Samuel. 5 vols. 1838. Wilson, Caroline, born Fry (1787-1846). The Listener. 1830. Wilson, Daniel (1778-1858), bishop of Calcutta. The Evidences of Christianity. 1828-30.474 Bibliography [CH. CHAPTER XIV HISTORIANS THOMAS ARNOLD, D.D. Contributions on Roman History to Encyclopedia Metropolitana, 1821-7. On Niebuhr's History of Rome. Quarterly Review. Vol. xxxn. 1825. Thucydides. Ed. Arnold, T. 3 vols. 1830-5. 2nd edn. 1840-2. 3rd edn. 1847-8. [With appendixes on questions of constitutional history and historical topography.] History of Rome. 3 vols. 1838-43, and later edns. [To end of Second Punic War.] The Second Punic War. Ed. Arnold, W. T. 1886. Introductory Lectures on Modern History: with Inaugural Lecture, 1841. Oxford, 1842, and later edns. History of the later Roman Commonwealth. 2 vols. 1845. Miscellaneous works. Ed. Stanley, A. P. 1845. Stanley, A. P. Sermon preached in the Chapel of Rugby School on the death of Rev. T. Arnold. Rugby, 1842. Life and Correspondence of Thomas Arnold. 2 vols. 1844, and later edns. [Contains a full bibliography in vol. II.] See, also, bibliography to chap. xII, ante. WILLIAM THOMAS ARNOLD The Roman system of Provincial Administration. 1879. New edn. 1906. 3rd edn. 1914. Studies of Roman Imperialism. Ed. Fiddes, E., with memoir of the author. Manchester, 1906. See, also, ante, Arnold, Thomas. WILLIAM BRIGHT History of the Church A.D. 313-451. Oxford, 1860. Chapters of early English Church History. Oxford, 1878. The Roman See in the Early Church, and other Studies in Church History. 1896. HENRY FYNES CLINTON See bibliography to chap. xv, sect. II. [SIR] GEORGE WILLIAM Cox Poems, legendary and historical. (With Freeman, E. A.) 1850. The Tale of the Great Persian War. 1861. [And other historical manuals.] Tales from Greek Mythology. 1861, and later edns. The Mythology of the Aryan nations. 2 vols. 1870. New edn. 1882. A History of Greece. 2 vols. 1874. An Introduction to the science of Comparative Mythology and Folklore. 1881. Lives of Greek Statesmen. 2 vols. 1886. Life of Bp Colenso. 2 vols. 1888.em] W i ~



xiv] Listorzans 475 NATHAN DAVIS Carthage and her Remains. 1861. Ruined Cities within Numidian and Carthaginian territories. 1862. WILLIAM BODHAM DONNE Essays upon the Drama. 1858. Letters of George III to Lord North. (Ed.) 1867. Euripides. (Classics for English Readers.) Edinburgh, 1872. Tacitus. (Ibid.) 1873. Contributions to The Saturday Review, etc. Johnson, C. B. Donne and his Friends. 1905. GEORGE FINLAY Remarks on the Topography of Oropia and Diacria. Athens, 1838. G. Finlays Historisch-topographische Abhandlungen fiber Attika... aus dem Englischen fibers.... und mit Bemerkungen, hrsg. von Hoffmann, S. F. W. Leipzig, 1842. Greece under the Romans. Edinburgh, 1844. Trans. into German. History of Greece from its Conquest by the Crusaders to its Conquest by the Turks, and of the Empire of Trebizond, 1204-1461. Edinburgh, 1851. Trans. into German. History of the Byzantine and Greek Empires, 716-1453. 2 vols. Edinburgh, 1853-4. History of Greece under Othoman and Venetian domination 1452-1821. 1856. History of the Greek Revolution (to 1843). 2 vols. Edinburgh, 1862. A History of Greece from its Conquest by the Romans to the Present Time, B.C. 146 to A.D. 1864. Ed. Tozer, H. F. 7 vols. Oxford, 1877. Autobiography in Tozer's edn of the History of Greece, vol. I. EDWARD AUGUSTUS FREEMAN History of Federal Government. Vol. I. General Introduction. Cambridge, 1863. Ed. Bury, J. B., 1893, as History of Federal Government in Greece and Italy. Historical Essays. 2nd series. 1873. The History of Sicily from the earliest times. Vols. I-III. Vol. IV, ed. Evans, A. J. Oxford, 1891-4. Sicily: Phoenician, Greek, Roman. (Story of the Nations series.) 1892. See, also, bibliography to chapter on Historians in vol. xIv. GEORGE GROTE Essentials of Parliamentary Reform. 1831. History of Greece. 12 vols. (Vols. I, I, 1845; III, IV, 1847; v, VI, 1848; VII, VIII, 1850; Ix, x, 1852; XI, 1853; xiI, 1856.) 8 vols. 1862. 12 vols. 1869-70. Condensed edn, with notes and appendices by Mitchell, J. M. and Caspari, M. O. B. 1907. Seven Letters [rptd from The Spectator] on the recent politics of Switzerland. 1847. New edn, with unpublished letter to A. de Tocqueville. 1876. Plato and the other Companions of Socrates. 3 vols. 1865. Cope, E. M. Theaetetus and Grote's Criticisms. 1866.476

Bibliography

[CH.

Aristotle. Edd. Bain, A. and Robertson, G. C. 2 vols. 1872. [Vol. II contains the paper on the De Anima, rptd from Bain, A., The Senses and the Intellect, 3rd edn, 1868.] Minor Works. Ed. with remarks on Grote, by Bain, A. 1873. Fragments on Ethical subjects: from his posthumous papers. Ed. Bain, A. 1876. Also numerous contributions to The Westminster Review. The Personal Life of George Grote. By Mrs Grote. 1873. THOMAS HODGKIN Italy and her Invaders. 8 vols. Oxford, 1880-99. Letters of Cassiodorus. Condensed translation of Variae Epistolae, with introduction by Hodgkin, T. 1886. The Dynasty of Theodosius. Oxford, 1889. Theodoric the Goth. New York, 1891. George Fox. Boston, 1896. Charles the Great. 1897. The Walls, Gates, and Aqueducts of Rome. 1899. The History of England to the Norman Conquest. (Vol. I of The Political History of England, edd. Hunt, W. and Poole, R. L.) 1906. The Wardens of the Northern Marches. Creighton Memorial Lecture, 1907. 1907. Ernst Curtius. Proc. of British Academy. 1908. THOMAS KEIGHTLEY Outlines of History. 1830. The History of the War of Greek Independence. 2 vols. Edinburgh, 1830. The Mythology of Ancient Greece and Italy. 1831. 2nd edn. 1838. The History of Greece, 1835. 4th edn. 1842. The History of Rome. 1836. The History of England. 3 vols. 1839, and later edns. Trans. into German. The History of the Roman Empire. 1840. 6th edn. 1849. Notes on the Bucolics and Georgics of Virgil: with excursus, etc. 1846. The History of India. 1846-7. An Account of the Life and Writings of John Milton: with an introduction to Paradise Lost. 1855. Keightley also produced an edn of Shakespeare (6 vols, 1864) and two semihistorical works. SIR GEORGE CORNEWALL LEWIS See bibliography to chap. xv, sect. II. GEORGE LONG See bibliography to chap. xv, sect. I. CHARLES MERIVALE, DEAN OF ELY The History of the Romans under the Empire. 7 vols. 1850-64. New edn. 8 vols. 1865. C. Sallustii Crispi Catilina et Jugurtha. Ed. Merivale, C. 1852. The Fall of the Roman Republic: a short history of the last century of the Commonwealth. 1853, and later edns. An Account of the Life and Letters of Cicero. From the German of B. R. Abeken. Ed. Merivale, C. 1854.-1

TT.

xivj zstorzans 477 Art. Niebuhr in Encyclopaedia Britannica, 8th edn, vol. xvi. 1858. Keatsii Hyperionis libri IIm. Latine redd. 1863. 2nd edn, with additions. 1882. The Conversion of the Roman Empire. (Boyle Lecture.) 1864. The Conversion of the Northern Nations. (Boyle Lecture.) 1866. Homer's Iliad, in English rhymed verse. 1869. The Contest between Pagan and Christian Society. (Christian Evidence Soc.) 1872. General History of Rome from the foundation of the City to the Fall of Augustulus. 1875. 3rd edn. 1876. Abridged edn. 1877. The Roman Triumvirates. (Epochs of Ancient History.) 1876. 4th edn. 1885. St Paul at Rome. 1877. The Conversion of the Continental Teutons. 1878. Four Lectures on some epochs of Early Church History. 1879. Also numerous articles in The Saturday Review in 1858 and subsequent years. For a list of Dean Merivale's sermons and pamphlets see art. by Rigg, J. iM., in D. of N. B. Autobiography of Dean Merivale with selections from his Correspondence. 1899. HENRY HART MILMAN, DEAN OF ST PAUL'S Fazio. A Tragedy. 1815. 6th edn. 1818. Samor, the Lord of the Bright City. An Heroic Poem. 1818. The Martyr of Antioch. Dramatic Poem. 1822. Belshazzar. A Dramatic Poem. 1822. Anne Boleyn. A Dramatic Poem. 1826. The History of the Jews. 3 vols. 1829. 2nd edn. 1830. 3rdedn. 1863. Poetical works. 3 vols. 1839. Life of Gibbon: with selections from his Correspondence. 1839. The History of Christianity to the abolition of Paganism in the Roman Empire. 3 vols. 1840, and later edns. The History of Latin Christianity including that of the Popes to Nicholas V. 6 vols. 1854-5. 4th edn. 9 vols. 1867. Lord Macaulay. Obituary in the Proceedings of the Royal Society. 1862. Annals of St Paul's Cathedral. Ed. Milman, A. 1868. Savonarola, Erasmus, and other Essays. Ed. Milman, A. 1870. The late Dean of St Paul's. By Stanley, A. P. Macmillan's Magazine. January 1869. Henry Hart Milman, D.D. Dean of St Paul's: a biographical sketch. By his Son, Arthur Milman. 1900. HENRY FRANCIS PELHAM Outlines of Roman history (enlarged from art. in Encyclopaedia Britannica, 1887). 1893. Essays. Ed. Haverfield, H. Oxford, 1911. GEORGE RAWLINSON The History of Herodotus. A new English version ed. with copious notes and appendices by Rawlinson, G., assisted by Rawlinson, Sir H. and Wilkinson, Sir J. G. 4 vols. 1858-60. 2nd edn. 1862. The Five Great Monarchies of the Eastern World: Chaldaea, Assyria, Babylonia, Media, and Persia. 4 vols. 1862-7. 4th edn. 3 vols. 1879.478 Bibliography [CH. The Sixth Great Oriental Monarchy: Parthia. 1873. The Seventh Great Oriental Monarchy: the Sassanian or New Persian Empire. 1876. The History of Ancient Egypt. 2 vols. 1881. A Sketch of Universal History. 1887. The History of Phoenicia. 1889. Contributions to (Sir) W. Smith's Dictionary of the Bible, etc. REGINALD BOSWORTH SMITH Carthage and the Carthaginians. 1878. New edn. 1897. Life of Lord Lawrence. 2 vols. 1883. 3rd edn. 1883. Grogan, Lady E. J. Reginald Bosworth Smith: a memoir. 1909. SIR WILLIAM SMITH See bibliography to chap. xv, sect. I. ARTHUR PENRHYN STANLEY, DEAN OF WESTMINSTER Historical Memoirs of Canterbury. 1885. Sinai and Palestine in connection with their history. 1856, and later edns. Three Introductory Lectures on the study of Ecclesiastical History. Oxford, 1857. Lectures on the History of the Eastern Church. 1861. Lectures on the History of the Jewish Church. 3 pts. 1863-76. New edn. 3 vols. 1883. Memorials of Westminster Abbey. 1868. Lectures on the History of the Church of Scotland. 1872. The Life and Correspondence of A. P. Stanley. By Prothero, R. E., with the cooperation of Bradley, G. G. 2 vols. 1893. [With full bibliography.] See, also, Arnold, Thomas, and bibliography to chap. XII, ante. CHARLES ANTHONY SWAINSON (1820-1887) The Nicene and Apostles' Creeds: their history, with account of the ' Creed of St Athanasius.' 1875. The Greek Liturgies, chiefly from Original; Sources. 1884. CONNOP THIRLWALL, BISHOP OF ST DAVID'S Primitiae, or essays and poems on various subjects, religious, moral, and entertaining. By Connop Thirlwall, eleven years of age. 1809. Niebuhr, B. History of Rome. Vols. I and II transl. by Hare, J. C. and Thirlwall, C.; vol. 11 by Smith, W. and Schmitz, L. 3 vols. Cambridge, 1828-42. A Vindication of Niebuhr's History of Rome from the charges of the Quarterly Review. [By Hare and Thirlwall.] Cambridge, 1829. Letter to the Rev. T. Turton on the Admission of Dissenters to Academical Degrees. Cambridge, 1834. Second Letter. Cambridge, 1834. A History of Greece. 8 vols. 1835-44. New edn. 1845-52. Speech on the Civil Disabilities of the Jews. 1848. Letter to the Rev. Rowland Williams. 1860. Reply to a Letter of the Lord Bishop of Capetown. 1867. Remains, literary and theological. Ed. Perowne, J. J. S. 3 vols. 1877-80. Letters, literary and theological. Ed. Perowne, J. J. S. and Stokes, L. 1881. Letters to a Friend [Miss Johns]. Ed. Stanley, A. P. 1881. For chronological list of writings see art. by Clark, J. W. in D. of N. B. vol. LVI, 1898.__ -1

-Y 7 7 "I 7 7

vxj lasszcal sc/holars 479 CHAPTER XV SCHOLARS, ANTIQUARIE ANAND BIBLIOGRAPHERS I. CLASSICAL SCHOLARS The classical scholars and archaeologists mentioned in this chapter are noticed by Sir John Edwin Sandys, in his History of Classical Scholarship, vol. ii (Cambridge, 1908) c. xxiv, pp. 421-439, and vol. III (1908) c. XL, pp. 393 -449; also in his Short History of Classical Scholarship (Cambridge, 1915), c. xxxv, pp. 273-7, and c. XLVIII, pp. 394-419. Evelyn Abbott (1843-1901) Ed. Hellenica, A collection of Essays, ed. by E. A., 1880. Herodotus, v, VI, Oxford, 1893. Pericles and the Golden Age of Athens, 1891. History of Greece, 3 vols., 1888-1900. Life of Jowett (with Campbell, Lewis), 1897. James Adam Plato, Apology, 1887; Crito and Euthyphro, 1888; Protagoras, 1893; Republic, (a) Text, 1897; (b) Text and Commentary, Cambridge, 1902. The Nuptial Number of Plato. 1891. On the Divine Origin of the Soul, pp. 29f. in Cambridge Praelections. 1906. The Religious Teachers of Greece, being Gifford Lectures on Natural Religion delivered at Aberdeen; edited, with a memoir, by his wife. Edinburgh, 1908. The Vitality of Platonism and other Essays, edited by the same. Cambridge, 1911. Francis Adams (1796-1861) Transl. Hero and Leander, Aberdeen, 1820; and, for Sydenham society, Paulus Aegineta, 3 vols., 1844-7; Hippocrates, 2 vols., 1849; Aretaeus, 1856; etc. Henry Ellis Allen Cicero, De Natura Deorum (London, 1836), De Divinatione and De Fato (1839), De Officiis (Dublin, 1842), Cato maior (1852), Laelius (1853), De Finibus (1856); Emendationes in Cic. Epp. Fam. et ad Att., Observationes in 1. de Fato (1854); Obs. in Cic. Caes. Front. (1863); Em. in Livium (1864); Obs. in Curtium (Dublin, 1865). Hannibal defensus (London, 1865(8)). In Sallustiuml curae secundae (1865). Em. Livianae alterae, 1867-9. Obs. in Caesaris commentarios, inest interpretatio loci cuiusdam Virgiliani, 1874. Richard Dacre Archer-Hind Plato, Phaedo, 1883; and Timaeus, 1888. Translations into Greek Verse and Prose, 1905. Thomas Arnold See bibliography to chap. XIv, ante.480 Bibliography [CH. Churchill Babington Hyperides, Oration against Demosthenes, Oxford, 1850; Orations for Lycophron and Euxenippus, Cambridge, 1853; Funeral Oration, 1858; with notes, 1859. Classical MSS, in Catalogue of MSS in the University Library, Cambridge, vols. I-III, 1856-8. The Influence of Christianity in promoting the Abolition of Slavery. Cambridge, 1846. Mr Macaulay's Character of the Clergy...considered. lb. 1849. Facsimile reprint of the Beneficio della morte di Christo. Ib. 1855. An introductory lecture on Archaeology. Cambridge, 1865. Ed., in Rolls Series, Bishop Pecock's Repressor, 1860, and Higden's Polychronicon, 2 vols., 1865-9. The Birds of Suffolk. 1884-6. Charles Badham Euripides, Ion, with Latin preface and notes, London, 1851, etc., with notes for beginners, 1861, etc.; Iph. T. et Helena, em. et notulas subiecit, 1851 and 1856. Plato, Phaedrus, 1851; Philebus, with introduction and notes, 1855 and 1866, revised and enlarged, 1878; Euthydemus and Laches, Jena and London, 1865; Convivium, 1866. De Platonis epistolis. 1866. Papers in Philologus (x, 340-2, xxI, 405, 495); Rheinisches Museum, xxvII, 165-8, xxvIII, 174 f., 490-2; and Mnemosyne, II (1874), 300. Memoir by Campbell, Lewis, in Bursian's Biogr. Jahrb. 1884, pp. 92-98. John Stuart Blackie Lyrical Dramas of Aeschylus, translated into English Verse. 1850. Lays and Legends of Ancient Greece. 1856. Homer, 4 vols.: I, Dissertations; ii and III, Translation into Ballad Metre; iv, Philological and archaeological notes. Edinburgh, 1866. Discourse on Greek Pronunciation; Accent and Quantity. 1852. The Place and Power of Accent in Language. (Royal Soc. of Edin.) 1870. Musa Burschicosa. Edinburgh, 1869. Dialogues in Greek and English, 1871; followed by a grammatical supplement entitled Greek Primer, 1891. Translation of Goethe's Faust. 1834. Lyrical Poems. 1859. War-songs from the German. 1870. Lays of the Highlands and Islands. 1872. Language and Literature of the Highlands. 1876. The Wisdom of Goethe. 1883. Messis Vitae, or Gleanings of Song from a Happy Life. 1886. Life of Burns. 1888. Essays on Subjects of Moral and Social Interest 1890; etc. Life (with portrait) by Stodart, A. M. 1895. New edn. 1906. Joseph William Blakesley A Life of Aristotle. Cambridge, 1839. Herodotus, in Bibliotheca Classica. 2 vols. 1852-4. Four Months in Algeria, with a Visit to Carthage. Cambridge, 1859. Frederick Henry Miarvell Blaydes (1818-1908) Sophocles, Oedipus Tyrannus, Oedipus Col., Antigone, in Bibliotheca Classica, vol. i, 1859; Philoctetes, 1870; Antigone, Halle, 1905; Electra, ib. 1906. Aristophanes, 12 vols., ib. 1880-93; 2 vols., ib. 1886. Aeschylus, Agamemnon, ib. 1898; Choiphoroe, ib. 1899; Eumenides, ib. 1900.xv]

Classical Scholars

481

Adversaria in Comicorum Graecorum fragmenta, zb. 1890-6; in Tragicorum Graecorum fragmenta, ib. 1894; in Aeschylum, ib. 1895; in varies poetas Graecos ac Latinos, ib. 1898; in Aristophanem, ib. 1899; Sophoclem, 1899; Euripidem, 1901; Thucydidem, 1903. Spicilegium Aristophaneum, Halle, 1902; Tragicum, 1902; Sophocleum, 1903. Analecta Graeca, 1905 Tragica Graeca, 1906; Miscellanea Critica, 1907. Charles James Blomfield Articles on Butler's Aeschylus in Edinburgh Review for October 1809, Jan. 1810, and Feb. 1812. Aeschylus, Prometheus, 1810; 4th edn, 1825; Septem, 1812; Persae, 1814; Agamemnon, 1818; Choephoroe, 1824, Cambridge, with notes and glossaries. Index to the glossaries, London, 1829. Notes on Eumenides in Linwood's Aeschylus. 1844. Callimachus. 1815. Sappho (Museum Criticum, I, 3 f., 250f.); Alcaeus (ib. I, 423 f.), Stesichorus (ii, 256 f.); Sophron (II, 340 f., 559 f.). Porsoni Adversaria, ed. Monk et Blomfield. 1812. Articles in The Edinburgh Review, no. 34, on Gaisford's Hephaestion, and no. 42, on Hermann's Photius; in The Quarterly Review, no. 18, on Elmsley's Heraclidae; no. 29, on Monk's Alcestis; and no. 44, on Stephen's Thesaurus. Memoir by Luard, H. R., in Journal of Classical and Sacred Philology, iv (1858), 196-200; and by Blomfield, Alfred, 2 vols., 1864, especially chaps. I and 11. Edward Valentine Blomfield (1788-1816) Translation of Matthiae's Greek Grammar, ed. Blomfield, C. J., 2 vols. 1818. 5th edn, revised by Kenrick, J. 1837. Memoir in Museum Criticum, 11, 520-8. Thomas Burgess (1756-1837) Reprinted Burton's five Greek plays, Oxford, 1778-9, and Dawes' Miscellanea Critica, London, 1781. A Vindication of 1 John v 7, 1821; 2nd edn, 1823. A Selection of Tracts and Observations on 1 John v 7, 1824. A letter to the Clergy of the Diocese of St David's, 1825. Adnotationes Millii etc. ad 1 Joann. v 7, 1822. Answered in Turton's Vindication of the Literary Character of the late Professor Porson, 1827. Samuel Henry Butcher Demosthenes (Classical Writers series), 1881; Demosthenes (critical text), vol. i, Oxford, 1903; vol. ii, ib. 1907. Aristotle's theory of Poetry and the Fine Arts, with a Critical Text and Translation of the Poetics. 1895, 1897, 1903, 1907. Some Aspects of the Greek Genius. 1891, 1893, 1904. Harvard Lectures on Greek Subjects. 1904. Samuel Butler Aeschylus. 4 vols. Cambridge, 1809-15. Sketch of Modern and Ancient Geography. 1813, etc. Atlas of Ancient Geography. 1822, etc. Praxis on the Latin prepositions. 1823, etc. Life and Letters, by his grandson, 2 vols., 1896; also notice in Mayor's edn of Baker's History of St John's College, vol. II, pp. 908-921. Ingramn Bywater Fragments of Heraclitus. 1877. Priscianus Lydus (for the Berlin Academy). 1886. Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics (critical text). Oxford, 1890. Aristotelis de Arte Poetica Liber (critical text). lb. 1897. Aristotle on the Art of Poetry, with Translation and Commentary. Ib. 1909. The Erasmian pronunciation of Greek, and its Precursors. Oxford, 1908.

E. L. XII.

31482 Bibliography [CH. Articles in The Journal of Philology, vols. I, on the Fragments attributed to Philolaus the Pythagorean (1868); II, A Lost Dialogue of Aristotle; iv, Critical Notes on Clement of Alexandria; A Passage in Aristotle's Ethics (vii c. 8); vii, Aristotle's Dialogue On Philosophy; xII, The Cleophons in Aristotle; xIII, On Diogenes Laert. ix, 1, 7; xvII, Aristotelia IIi; Miscellanea; xxvII, Milton and the Aristotelian Definition of Tragedy; xxvIII, Aristotelia Iv; xxxI, ATAKTA II; XXII, Palaeographica; xxxIII, the Latinizations of the modern surname (1913). Catalogue of his Collection of rare Greek works, privately printed. 1911. Lewis Campbell (1830-1908) Sophocles. 2 vols., Oxford, 1871 (2nd edn, 1879) -81. Plato, Theaetetus, 1861 (2nd edn, 1883); Sophistes and Politicus, 1867; Republic (with Jowett, B.), 3 vols., 1894. Sophocles in English verse, 1883; new edn, 1906; Aeschylus in English verse, 1890, and text in Parnassus series, 1897. Guide to Greek Tragedy, 1891. Religion in Greek Literature, 1898. Life (1897) and Letters (1899) of Benjamin Jowett (with Abbot, Evelyn). John Conington Aeschylus, Agamemnon, 1848, and Choephoroe, 1857. Virgil. In three vols.: I, Bucolics and Georgics, 1858; 4th edn, 1881; ii, Aeneid i-vi, 1864; 4th edn, 1889; iii, Aeneid, vii-xii, 1871; 3rd edn, 1884. Translation in English prose included in Miscellaneous Writings, 1872. Aeneid in verse, 1866; 3rd edn, 1870. The Satires of Persius, with translation and commentary. Oxford, 1872. Horace, (a) the Odes and Carmen Saeculare, 1863; (6) the Satires, Epistles, and Art of Poetry, translated into English Verse, 1870. Homer's Iliad, i-xii translated into Spenserian stanzas by Worsley, P. S. [the translator of the Odyssey] and xiii-xxiv by Conington. 1868. Miscellaneous Writings, with memoir by Smith, H. J. S. 2 vols. 1872. Edward Meredith Cope Plato, Gorgias, transl. 1864; Phaedo, transl., ed. Jackson, H., 1875. Aristotle's Rhetoric: (1) Introduction, 1867; (2) Commentary, ed. Sandys, (Sir) J. E., 1877. Papers (1) on the Sophists, and (2) (3) (4) on the Sophistical Rhetoric, in The Journal of Classical and Sacred Philology: (1) I, 145 ff., June 1854; (2) ii, 129 ff., May 1855; (3) II, 34 ff., March 1856; (4) iii, 353 ff., December 1856. Memoir by Munro, H. A. J., prefixed to Cope's Commentary on the Rhetoric. Peter Paul Dobree Ed. Porson's Aristophanica, with his own commentary on the Plutus, Cambridge, 1820; also Porson's transcript of the lexicon of Photius, Cambridge, 1822. Seholefield, J., edited D.'s Adversaria on the Greek Poets, Historians, and Orators, in 4 vols., 1831-3; his Lexicon rhetoricum Cantabrigiense, 1834; and his Miscellaneous Notes on Inscriptions, 1835. John William Donaldson The New Cratylus, 1839; 3rd edn, 1859. Varronianus, 1844; 3rd edn, 1860. The Theatre of the Greeks, a treatise on the history and exhibition of the Greek Drama, with various supplements. 1836; 8th edn, 1875 Pindar's Odes, with the Fragments, revised and explained. 1841. Sophocles, Antigone, Greek and English. 1848. Thucydides, criticalxv] Classical Scholars 483 text. 2 vols. Cambridge, 1859. K. O. Muiller's History of Greek Literature, translated and completed by J. W.D. 3 vols. 1858. Classical Scholarship and Classical Learning. Cambridge, 1856. Complete Latin Grammar, enlarged. Ib. 1860. Greek Grammar. 3rd edn. lb. 1862. Jashar: Fragmenta Archetypa Carminum Hebraicorum, 1854; new edn, enl., 1860. William Bodham Donne See bibliography to chap. xiv, ante. Robinson Ellis Catullus, Oxford, 1866; larger edn, ib. 1867; 2nd edn, 1878; transl. in English verse, 1871; 2nd edn, 1889. Ibis, Oxford, 1881. Anecdota Oxoniensia, glosses upon Sidonius, 1885. Avianus, 1887. Orientius, 1888. Aetna, in Postgate's Corpus Poetarum Lat., 1896; 1901. Noctes Manilianae, 1891. Velleius Paterculus, 1898. Ciris, in Postgate's Corpus, 1894; and emendations in Haigh's edn, 1893. Appendix Vergiliana, Oxford, 1907. Biographical notice by Clark, A. C., Proc. of British Academy, vol. vI, 1914. Peter Elmsley Thucydides, gr. et lat., ex rec. Wassii et Dukeri. 6 vols. Edinburgh, 1804. Euripides, Ale. Androm. et El., cum variis lect. in u. s. Westmonasteriensis. 1806. Aristophanes, Acharn. em. et ill. 1809. Sophocles, O.T., 1811; Scholia, Oxford, 1811 (Leipzig, 1821, Oxford, 1825); O.C., 1823; Leipzig, 1824; Scholia in Soph., 1825; Leipzig, 1826; Notes on Ajax in Museum Criticum, I, 351 f., 469 f. Euripides, Heraclidae, 1813; Leipzig, 1821; Medea, 1818; ed. Hermann, 1822; Bacchae, 1821; Leipzig, 1822; all three abridged in Gretton's Elmsleiana Critica, 1833. Articles in The Edinburgh Review, no. 4, on Heyne's Iliad; no. 5, on Schweighiiuser's Athenaeus; no. 35, on Blomfield's Prometheus Yinctus; and no. 37, on Porson's Hecuba; in The Quarterly, vii, 441-464, on Markland's edn of Eur. Suppl., Iph. A., Iph. T.; and in The Classical Journal, vol. vm, 1813, 199 if., 417 ff., on Hermann's Supplices and Hercules Furens. Thomas Saunders Evans (1816-1889) Mathematogonia. The mythological birth of the nymph Mathesis. Cambridge, 1839. Tennyson's Oenone translated into Latin hexameters. Ib. 1873. The First Epistle to the Corinthians, in The Speaker's Commentary, 1881. Latin and Greek Verse, with Memoir by Waite, Joseph. Cambridge, 1893. William Henry Forbes (1851-1914) Thucydides, book i, with introduction and notes. Oxford, 1895. Henry Furneaux (1829-1900) The Annals of Tacitus, ed. 2 vols. Oxford, 1884-91; 2nd edn, 1896-1907. Thomas Gaisford Cicero, Tuscul. Oxford, 1805. Andronici Rhodii Ethicorum Nicom. paraphr. graeca, 1809. Euripides, Hec. Or. Phoen., cum notis Musgravii cur., 1809; Suppl., cum notis Marklandii, 1818. Hlephaestionis Encheiridion, Procli chrest., 1810; Leipzig, 1832, iterum recensuit, ace. Terentiano Mauro, 2 vols., 1856; Scriptores latinos rei metricae refinxit, 1837. 31-2484 Bibliography [CH. Poetae Graeci Minores (Hesiod, Theognis, etc.). 4 vols. 1814-20; 5 vols. Leipzig, 1822-3. Catalogue of the Greek MSS of D'Orville, 1806, and Clarke, E. D., 1812. Lectiones Platonicae (from the Bodleian Plato). Ace. Porsoni annotata ad Pausaniam. 1820. Variorum edition of Aristotle's Rhetoric. 1820. Stobaei florilegium, 4 vols., 1822; Leipzig, 1822-5; eclogae physicae et ethicae. Ace. Hieroclis comm. in aurea carmina Pythagoreorum, 2 vols., 1850. Herodotus, cum notis variorum, 1824; Leipzig, 1824-6; 2 vols., 1840. Suidae lexicon recensuit. 3 vols. 1834-7. Paroemiographi Graeci. 1836. Pearsoni adversaria Hesychiana. 2 vols. Oxford, 1844. Etymologicum Magnum recensuit et notis variorum instruxit. 1848 f. Theodoreti affectionum curatio, 1839; Ecclesiastica Historia, cum notis Valesii, 1854. Eusebii Eclogae Propheticae, primum ed., 1842; Evangelica Praeparatio, 4 vols., 1843; Evangelica Demonstratio, 2 vols., 1852; contra Hieroclem et Marcellum, 1852. Choerobosci dictata in Theodosii canones. 3 vols. 1842. Sir William Duguid Geddes Plato, Phaedo, 1863; 1885. The problem of the Homeric poems, 1878. Edward Hamilton Gifford (1820-1905) Eusebius, Praeparatio Evangelica. 4 vols. Oxford, 1903. The Euthydemus of Plato, with revised text, introduction, notes, and indices. Oxford, 1905. The Epistle to the Romans (in The Speaker's Commentary). 1881. William Ewart Gladstone Studies on Homer and the Homeric Age, 3 vols., 1858. Juventus Mundi, 1869. Homeric Synchronism, 1876. Primer on Homer, 1878. Translations by Lord Lyttelton and W. E. G., 2nd edn, 1863. Transl. of the Odes of Horace, 1894-5; etc. Sir Alexander Grant Aristotle's Ethics, with an English Commentary, and illustrative Essays, 1857; 4th edn, 1884. Xenophon (1871) and Aristotle (1877). (Ancient Classics.) Edinburgh. The Story of the University of Edinburgh, during its First Three Hundred Years. 2 vols. Edinburgh, 1884. William Charles Green (1832-1914) Ed. eight plays of Aristophanes, Peace, Birds, Frogs, etc., 1873, etc. Verse transl. of Iliad I-xI, 1884; and of Horace's Odes, 1903. Transl. of the Egilssaga, from the Icelandic, 1893. Arthur Elam Haigh (1855-1905) The Attic Theatre, 1889; 2nd edn, 1898. The Tragic Drama of the Greeks, 1896. Virgil, ed. with Papillon, T. L., 2 vols., 1892. Henry Hayman (1823-1904) The Odyssey of Homer, 3 vols., 1866, 1873, 1882xv]

Classical Scholars

485

TWalter George Headlam On editing Aeschylus, 1891; The plays of Aeschylus transl. (with Headlam, C. E. S.), 1908. Agamemnon, with... verse transl. and notes (ed. Pearson, A. C.), 1910. Contributions to Cambridge compositions, 1899. Meleager, 50 poems transl., 1900. A Book of Greek Verse, 1907. Articles in Journal of Philology, vols. xx, xxI, xxIII, xxvI, xxx, and in Classical Review, vol. xiII, etc. Hubert Ashton Holden Aristophanes: Text. Cambridge, 1848; Onomasticon. 2nd edn. 1871. Thucydides, bk viI. Cambridge, 1891. Xenophon, Cyropaedeia. Ib. 1887; Hieron. 1883; Oeconomicus. 1884. Plutarch's Lives: Themistokles, 1881; Perikles, 1894; Gracchi, Cambridge, 1885; Sulla, 1886; Nikias, ib. 1887; Timoleon, ib. 1889; Demosthenes, ib. 1893. Cicero, De Officiis, Cambridge, 1869, etc.; Pro Plancio, ib. 1881; Pro Sestio, ib. 1883. M. Minuci Felicis Octavius. lb. 1853. Caesar Morgan on the Trinity of Plato. Ib. 1853. Foliorum Silvula, Select Passages for translation into (i) Latin Elegiac and Hexameter Verse, (ii) Latin Lyric and Comic Iambic Verse, (iii) Greek Verse. Ib. 1852, etc. Folia Silvulae, sive Eclogae Poetarum Anglicorum in Latinum et Graecum conversae. Ib. 1865-70. Foliorum Centuriae,... for translation into Latin and Greek Prose. lb. 1852. Arthur Holmes (1837-1875) Demosthenes, Midias, Cambridge, 1862, 1868; De Corona, London, 1871. Prelection on the Nemeian Odes of Pindar. 1867. Sir Richard Claverhouse Jebb Sophocles, (1) Electra, 1867 (1870), and Ajax, 1868 (1880), in Catena Classicorum; (2) with critical notes, commentary and translation into English prose, Cambridge: Oedipus Tyrannus, 1883; Oedipus Coloneus, 1885; Antigone, 1888; Philoctetes, 1890; Trachiniae, 1892; Electra, 1894, and Ajax, 1896; also, in separate volumes, text, 1897; and translation, 1904 f. Theophrastus, Characters, an English translation from a revised text, with introduction and notes, 1870; new edn by Sandys, (Sir) J. E., 1909. The Attic Orators from Antiphon to Isaeos, 2 vols., 1876; 2nd edn, 1893. Selections from Attic Orators with notes, 1880, 1881. Some Remarks on an article by J. P. Mahaffy in The Academy for April 1, 1876; and Rejoinder to Mahaffy's Reply, 1877. A Primer of Greek Literature. 1877, etc. Modern Greece, two lectures..., with papers on The Progress of Greece and Byron in Greece. 1880. Bentley. (English Men of Letters series). 1882. Homer, an introduction to the Iliad and the Odyssey. Glasgow, 1887, etc. Erasmus. (Rede Lecture, 11 June.) Cambridge, 1890. The Growth and Influence of Classical Greek Poetry, lectures delivered... in the Johns Hopkins University (Baltimore). 1893. Bacchylides, the poems and fragments, edited with introduction, notes, and prose translation, Cambridge, 1905; separate edn of text alone, 1906. Aristotle's Rhetoric, a translation, edited with an introduction and supplementary notes by Sandys, (Sir) J. E. Cambridge, 1909.486

Bibliography

[CH.

Translations into Greek and Latin Verse. Cambridge, 1873, 1907. Speeches delivered by the Public Orator on 16 June, printed by request in the Cambridge University Reporter, 23 June 1874 (and separately, in a limited edn, 1875). Articles on Classical subjects in The Encyclopaedia Britannica (9th edn), 1875-88; and Chapters on Greek Literature and on Textual Criticism in A Companion to Greek Studies, Cambridge, 1905. Essays and Addresses (including Pindar, Humanism in Education, etc.). Cambridge, 1907. Life and Letters (with portrait) by Lady Jebb. Cambridge, 1907. Benjamin Jowett St Paul's Epistles to the Thessalonians, Galatians, and Romans. 2 vols. 1855; 3rd edn, 1894. The Dialogues of Plato, translated with analyses and introductions. 4 vols. Oxford, 1871; 5 vols., 1875. Republic, with text, notes, and essays, by Jowett and Campbell. 3 vols. Ib. 1894. Thucydides, translated, with introduction, marginal analysis, notes, and indexes. 2 vols. lb. 1881. The Politics of Aristotle, translated, with introduction, marginal analysis, essays, notes, and indices. 2 vols. Ib. 1885. Life, by Campbell, Lewis, and Abbott, Evelyn. 2 vols. Ib. 1897. Cf. Stephen, Sir L., Jowett's Life, in Studies of a Biographer, vol. II, 1898. Benjamin Hall Kennedy Tirocinium; Palaestra Latina; Curriculum Stili Latini, etc. Latin Primer. 1871. Public School Latin Grammar. 1876; 3rd edn, 1881. Virgil, School edition, 1876; 3rd edn, 1881; text, Cambridge, 1876-8. Aristophanes, Birds (1874); Aeschylus, Agamemnon (1878; 2nd edn, 1882); Sophocles, Oedipus Tyrannus (1882). Plato, Theaetetus, with translation and notes. 1881. Studia Sophoclea. 2 parts. 1874-84. Sabrinae Corolla. (Editor and principal contributor.) 1850, etc. Between Whiles, 1877; 2nd edn, 1882. Charles Rann Kennedy Translation of Select Speeches of Demosthenes (Against Aphobus I, II, Phanus, and Onetor I, II), Cambridge, 1841. Transl. of all the Orations of D., in Bohn's Classical Library, 5 vols., completed in 1863. Thomas Hewitt Key Essays on Terentian Metres, etc. 1844. Philological Essays. 1868. Origin and development of Language. 1874. Latin Grammar. 1846, etc. Latin Dictionary, published from his unfinished MS. Cambridge, 1888. Thomas Kidd (1770-1850) Opera Ruhnkenii. Ed. 1807. Tracts and Miscellaneous Criticisms of R. Porson. Ed. 1815. Horatii carmina ex rec. Bentleii ill. Cambridge, 1817. Dawesii Miscellanea Critica. Ed. 1817 (1827). Herbert Kynaston, formerly Snow (1835-1910) Theocritus, 1869. Poetae Graeci, 1879.xv] Classical Scholars 487 Henry George Liddell and Robert Scott A Greek-English Lexicon, compiled by Liddell, Henry George, and Scott, Robert. Oxford, 1843; 8th edn, 1897. William Linwood (1817-1878) Lexicon to Aeschylus. 1843,1847. Aeschylus, Eumenides. Oxford, 1844. Sophocles, with brief Latin notes, 2 vols., 1846-52; 4th edn, 1877; The Theban Trilogy of Sophocles, with copious notes, 1878. George Long Two dissertations on Roman Law. 1827. Two discourses in the Middle Temple Hall on Roman Law, 1846; and on France and its Revolutions, 1850. Caesar, De Bello Gallico. 1853. Cicero De Amicitia, De Senectute, etc. 1860. Cicero's Orations. In Bibl. Classica. 4 vols. 1851-8. The Civil Wars of Rome: (thirteen) select lives from Plutarch. 2 vols. 1844-7. History of the Decline of the Roman Republic. 5 vols. 1864-74. Translation of the Meditations of Marcus Aurelius, 1862, and the Manual of Epictetus, 1877. Ed. for the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge, The Journal of Education, 1831-5; The Penny Cyclopaedia, 29 vols., 1832-46, and The Biographical Dictionary, 7 halfvols. to end of Letter A, 1842-4; and compiled The Standard Cyclopaedia of Political, Constitutional, and Forensic Knowledge, 4 vols., 1848. Matthews, H. J. In memoriam George Long. 1879. Wroth, W., in D. of N. B. vol. xxXIv, p. 102. Edmund Law Lushington On the study of Greek. An inaugural discourse. Glasgow, 1839. Ed. (with Sir Alexander Grant) James Frederick Ferrier's Lectures on Greek Philosophy..., 2 vols. Edinburgh, 1866. War of Rameses II with the Khitu (Engl. transl.), Egyptian Texts of Records of the Past [1875 c.]. Rectorial Address. Glasgow, 1885. Arthur John Macleane (1812-1858) Juvenal and Persius, 1857. Horace, new edn, 1857. Edward Maltby Lexicon Graeco-prosodiacum, 1815, 1824, 1850, etc.. John Eyton Bichersteth Mayor Thirteen Satires of Juvenal, in one vol., 1853; later edns in two, vol. I, 4th edn, 1886; vol. 1, 3rd edn, 1881. Cicero's Second Philippic (after Halm, K.), 1861; 6th edn, 1879. First Greek Reader. 1868. Homer's Odyssey, ixxii, Part i (1872), Book ix (1882). Quintilian, Inst. Or., x, pp. 1-147 (a fragment). 1872. Bibliographical Clue to Latin Literature (after Hiibner, E., with large additions). 1875. The Third Book of Pliny's Letters. 1880. Articles on Latin-English Lexicography in The Journal of Classical and Sacred Philology, ii (1855), 271-290, and iv (1857), 1-44; and in The Journal of Philology, notes on Juvenal, xvi, 220-8, xx, 252-293 (on Juvenal vIII). List of other contributions to classical periodicals by Duke, W. H., in The Eagle, Dec. 1911; abridged in Bursian's Biogr. Jahrb. vol. CLXIV, B, pp. 190 f. Bedae Historiae Ecclesiasticae libri III, iv, ed., with Lumby, J. R. Cambridge, 1878. The Latin Heptateuch (of Cyprian, Bishop of Toulon). Cambridge,488 Bibiography [CH. 1889. Tertullian's Liber Apologeticus (ed. Souter, A.). (In preparation.) Ricardi de Cirencestria Speculum Historiale de gestis Regum Angliae (Rolls Series). 2 vols. 1863-9. Early Statutes of St John's College, Cambridge. Cambridge, 1859. Thomas Baker's History of St John's College, Cambridge. 2 vols. 1869. C. H. Cooper's Memoir of Margaret, Countess of Richmond and Derby. Cambridge, 1874. English Works of Bishop Fisher (Early English Text Society). 1876. Two Lives of Nicholas Ferrar. 1855. Autobiography of Matthew Robinson. 1856. Roger Ascham's Schoolmaster. 1863; new edn, 1883. Life of Ambrose Bonwicke. 1870. Cambridge under Queen Anne: Ambrose Bonwicke, Franz Burman, Conrad von Uffenbach. 1911. Life of William Bedell. 1871. Spain, Portugal, The Bible. 1895. The Spanish Reformed Church. 1895. Modicus Cibi Medicus Sibi, or Nature her own Physician. 1880. Plain Living and High Thinking: selected Addresses and Sermons. 1897. Jacula Prudentium, a First German Reader. 1910. Twelve Cambridge Sermons, edited with a memoir by Stewart, H. F., and portrait. Cambridge, 1911. Twelve Parochial Sermons, ed. Stewart, H. F. Ib. 1913. Thomas Mitchell (1783-1845) Aristophanes, Acharnians, Knights, Clouds, Wasps, in English verse, 2 vols., 1820-2. Acharnians, Knights, Clouds, Wasps, Frogs, 4 vols., 1835-9. Sophocles, 1840-4. Index Graecitatis Isocraticae, Oxford, 1828. Index in oratores Atticos, 2 vols., ib. 1828. James Henry Monk Letter on the Cambridge Aeschylus. Cambridge, 1810. Euripides, Hippolytus. Cambridge, 1811; Alcestis, 1816; Iph. T., 1840; Iph. A., 1840; the four plays in one volume, 1858. Porsoni Adversaria, ed. Monk et Blomfield. 1812. Life of Bentley. 1830; 2nd edn, 2 vols., 1833. Charles Henry Monro (1835-1908) Justinian's Digest, transl. [unfinished]. 2 vols. Cambridge, 1904-9; etc. David Binning Monro Grammar of the Homeric Dialect. Oxford, 1882. Modes of Greek Music. Ib. 1894. Homer's Odyssey, books xmII-xxiv, with Appendices. Ib. 1901. Articles on the Homeric Question in The Quarterly Review, 1868, and The Encyclopaedia Britannica, 1880, etc. Memoir by Wilson, J. Cook. Oxford, 1907. Hugh Andrew Johnstone Munro Titi Lucreti Cari de rerum natura libri sex, (1) text, Cambridge, 1860; (2) with a translation and notes, 2 vols., Cambridge, 1864; 3rd edn, 1873; new edn, 1886. Aetna, revised, emended, and explained. Cambridge, 1867. Q. Horati Flacci Opera, illustrated from antique gems by King, C. W., the text revised, with introduction. 1869. Criticisms and Elucidations of Catullus, 1878; new edn, 1906. Pronunciation of Latin, 1871; Palmer and Munro's Syllabus, 1872. Paper in Journal of Class. and Sacred Philology, vol. 1I (1855), 58-81, maintaining the Eudemian origin of the fifth book of Aristotle's Ethics. Emendations of fragments of Lucilius, Journal of Philol. vol. vII, 292 if., vol. viII, 201 ff., and of Euripides, vol. x, 233 ff., vol. xi, 267 ff.; on Catullus, vol. viII, 333 ff.; vol. xi, 124, 141.xv]

Classical Scholars

489

Translations into Latin and Greek Verse, privately printed, 1884; published (with portrait), 1906. Robert Alexander Neil (1852-1901) Aristophanes, Knights, 1901. With Cowell, E. B., ed. the Divyavadana, 1886, and joined in transl. of the Jataka, 1897, etc. Henry Nettleship Completed Conington's edn of Virgil's Aeneid and of Persius. Began the English edn of Seyffert's Dictionary of Classical Antiquities, completed by Sandys, (Sir) J. E., 1891. Contributions to Latin Lexicography. Oxford, 1889. Essays in Latin Literature. Ib. 1885. Lectures and Essays, ed. Haverfield, F., with memoir (and portrait) by Mrs Nettleship. Ib. 1895. Frederick Apthorp Paley The Church Restorers, 1844. Ecclesiologist's Guide to Churches at Cambridge, 1844. Illustrations of Baptismal Fonts, 1844. Manual of Gothic Mouldings, 1845; 3rd edn, 1865. Manual of Gothic Architecture, 1846. Propertius, with English notes, 1853; new edn, 1872. Verse translations from Propertius. Cambridge, 1866. Ovid's Fasti, with English notes, 1854; new edn, 1860. Select Epigrams of Martial, with English notes, 1868. Aeschylus, (1) with Latin notes, 1844-51; (2) with English notes, 1855, etc.; (3) in English Prose,1864; (4) Commentarium in Scholia Aeschyli Medicea. Cambridge, 1878; (5) Supplices, Choephori, cum scholiis Graecis et brevi adnotatione critica. lb. 1883. Euripides, with an English commentary, in 3 vols.: I, 1857 (1872); II, 1858 (1874); III, 1860 (1880). Hesiod, the Epics of; with an English commentary. 1861. Theocritus, with Latin notes. Cambridge, 1863, 1869. Homer's Iliad, with English notes, in two vols. 1866-71. Pindar, translated into English prose. 1868. Sophocles, in Bibl. Classica, vol. II, 1880. Cf. Blaydes, F. H. M., ante. Aristophanes, Pax, with English notes. Cambridge, 1873. Demosthenes, Select Private Orations, part i, Cambridge, 1874; 3rd edn, revised by Sandys, (Sir) J. E., 1891. Plato, Philebus, and Theaetetus, transl. with notes. 1873 and 1875. Aristotle's Ethics, bks v and x, transl. 1872. Greek Wit: Smart Sayings from Greek Prose Writings. 2 vols. 1880-1. Fragments of Comic Greek Poets, with renderings in verse. 1888. A short treatise on Greek particles and their combinations. 1881. Bibliographia Graeca, an inquiry into the date and origin of book-writing among the Greeks. 1881. Papers: On the late date and the composite character of our Ilias and Odyssey, 1868; Pseudo-archaic words and inflexions in the Homeric vocabulary and their relation to the antiquity of the Homeric poems (Journal of Philol. vi, 114 f.), 1876; Quintus Smyrnaeus and the Homer of the Tragic poets, 1876; Homeri quae nunc exstant an reliquis cycli carminibus antiquiora jure habita sint, 1878; Post-Epic or Imitative words in Homer, 1879; Remarks on Mahaffy's Epic Poetry and History of Classical Greek Literature, 1881; The truth about Homer, 1887. Religious Tests and National Universities. 1871. The Gospel of St John: a verbatim translation from the Vatican MS, with the notable variations of the Sinaitic and Beza MSS, and brief explanatory comments. 1887. Memoir by Lewis, S. S., in Bursian's Biogr. Jahrb., Leipzig, 1889, pp. 15-17.490 Bibliography [CH. Arthur Palmer Ovid, Heroides xiv, 1874. Propertius, 1880. Horace, Satires, 1882; 6th edn, 1896. Plautus, Amphitruo, 1888. Catullus in Macmillan's Parnassus series, 1896. Articles in Hermathena, and, on Aristophanes, in The Quarterly Review, October 1884. Memoir by Tyrrell, R. Y., in Hermathena, x, 115-821. Samuel Parr Latin Preface to Gulielmi Bellendeni... de Statu libri tres; 2nd edn, 1787. A Spital Sermon (51 pp.), to which are added Notes (112 pp.). 1804. Johnstone's Memoirs, 8 vols., 1828; Life by Field, 2 vols., 1828; Barker, E. H., Parriana, 1828; De Quincey, ed. Masson, v 9-145; Blunt, J. J., The Quarterly Review, April 1829 (reprinted in Essays, 172-249); and Nicoll, H. J., Great Scholars, 1880, pp. 139-187. Mark Pattison See bibliography in vol. xiv. John Peile (1838-1910) Introduction to Greek and Latin Etymology. 1869, 1872, 1875. Primer of Philology. 1877. Notes on the Tale of Nala. 1881. Biographical Register, vol. I, 1910; and History, of Christ's College, Cambridge. 1900. Thomas Williamson Peile (1806-1882) Aeschylus, Agamemnon and Choiphoroe. 1839. Richard Porson A. Works and Editions Papers in Maty's Review: On Schiitz's Aeschylus, and on Brunck's Aristophanes, 1783; on Stephen Weston's Fragments of Hermesianax, and on G. I. Huntingford's Apology for the Monostrophics, 1784. Notes (on pp. xli-lix) and preface to Hutchinson's edition of Xenophon's Anabasis. 1786. Letters to The Gentleman's Magazine: (1) an ironical panegyric of Sir John Hawkins's Life of Johnson, August, September, October 1787; (2) Letters to Travis, 1788-9, published separately as Letters to Mr. Archdeacon Travis in answer to his Defence of the Three Heavenly Witnesses in 1 John v, 7. 1790. Articles in The Monthly Review: (1) defending the genuineness of the Parian Chronicle, 1789; and (2) reviewing T. Edwards's edition of the Plutarchic tract on education, 1793, and (3) R. Payne Knight's essay on the Greek alphabet, 1794. Notes and preface (1787) to new edition of Toup's Emendationes in Suidam. Oxford, 1790. Preface to the London edition of Heyne's Virgil, 4 vols., 1793. Aeschylus; corrections of the text in an edition printed at the Foulis Press, Glasgow, in two vols. 8vo in 1794, and published in London in 1806; also in the folio edition published by Foulis without Porson's knowledge in 1795. [Porson's name is not mentioned in either edition.] Contributions to the Morning Chronicle: Letter signed S. England, [parodying S. Ireland's publication of his son's Shakespeare forgeries byxv] Classical Scholars 49I stating that a learned friend had lately found some of the lost tragedies of Sophocles and enclosing as a specimen twelve iambic lines (a translation of Three children sliding on the ice)]. Included in Luard's Correspondence of Richard Person, pp. 60 ff., 1796. Imitations of Horace, 1797 [partly quoted in J. S. Watson's Life of Porson]. Euripides, Hecuba, 1797; Orestes, 1798; Phoenissae, 1799: tall three published anonymously in London; Medea, published under P.'s own name, at the Cambridge Press, 1801; Hecuba, 2nd edn, with supplement to preface, 1802. Euripidis tragoediae priores quatuor, ed. Ricardus Person, rec. suasque notulas subiecit Jacobus Scholefield. Cambridge, 1826. Collation of the Harleian MS of the Odyssey (Harl. MS 5674 in the British Museum) appended to the Grenville Homer. Oxford, 1801. Restorations of the last twenty-six lines of the Rosetta stone, Society of Antiquaries, 13 Jan. 1803; restorations in Kidd's Tracts, 1815, p. 182; transl. of the inscription in Clarke, E. D., Greek Marbles, 1809, pp. 56-65. B. Literary Remains Adversaria, being notes and emendations on Athenaeus and various Greek poets, edited by Monk, J. H., and Blomfield, C. J. Cambridge, 1812. Tracts and Miscellaneous Criticisms, collected by Kidd, T. Ib. 1815. Aristophanica, edited by Dobree, P. P. Ib. 1820. Notes on Pausanias, appended to Gaisford's Lectiones Platonicae. Oxford, 1820. Notes on Suidas, in appendix to Gaisford's edition. Oxford, 1834. The Lexicon of Photius, printed from Porson's transcript of the Codex Galeanus in the library of Trinity college, Cambridge, ed. by Dobree, P. P. 2 vols. Cambridge, 1822. Porson's Correspondence (a collection of 68 letters), ed. for the Cambridge Antiquarian Society, by Luard, H. R. Cambridge, 1867. Papers in the Library of Trinity College, arranged by Luard, H. R., in 1859 and bound in four volumes, containing: (1) the originals of many of the letters printed in the Correspondence; (2) Transcript of Photius; (3) Transcripts of the Medea and the Phoenissae; (4) notes on ancient authors, including a collation of the Aldine Aeschylus. Adversaria in most of the 274 books formerly belonging to Person, and now in the library of Trinity college. C. Biography and Criticism Memoirs in The Gentleman's Magazine, September and October 1808. Clarke, Adam. Narrative of Porson's last illness and death. 1808. Weston, Stephen. Short Account. 1808. Reissued with new preface, etc. 1814. Kidd, Thomas. Imperfect Outline of Porson's life, prefixed to the Tracts, etc. 1815. Beloe, W. The Sexagenarian, vol. I. 1817; 2nd edn, 1818. A Vindication of the Literary Character of the late Professor Porson, by Crito Cantabrigiensis (Turton, Thomas, afterwards bishop of Ely). Cambridge, 1829. English Scholarship; its Rise, Progress, and Decay (from Gataker to Dobree): three discursive anonymous articles in The Church of England Quarterly Review, iv, 9-125; v, 145-175, 398-426. 1838-9. Barker, E. H. Parriana, vol. ii, 1829, and Porsoniana, 1852. Maltby, E. Porsoniana in Dyce's Recollections of the Table-Talk of Samuel Rogers. 1856. Hawes, Siday. Short article in Knight's English Encyclopaedia. 1857.492 Bibliography [CH. Luard, Henry Richards. Porson. In Cambridge Essays (pp. 125-171), 1857; and in Encyclopaedia Britannica, 1885, etc. Watson, John Selby. Life of Porson. 1861. Nicoll, H. J. Porson. In Great Scholars. 1880. Jebb, (Sir) R. C. In D. of N. B. vol. XLVI, pp. 154-163. 1896. Edward Poste (1823-1902) The Logic of Science, 1850. Plato's Philebus, Oxford, 1860, transl. 1860. Aristotle on Fallacies, transl. 1866. Gains, with transl. and commentary, 1875. The skies and weather forecasts of Aratus, transl. 1880. Aristotle on the Constitution of Athens, transl. 1891. William Ramsay (1806-1865) Elegiac Extracts from Tibullus and Ovid, 1840; 3rd edn, 1859. Cicero, pro Cluentio, 2nd edn, 1859; new edn, Oxford, 1869. Plautus, Mostellaria. 1869. Manual of Latin Prosody, 1840; 2nd edn, 1859; Elementary ditto, 1860. Manual of Roman Antiquities, 1851; 6th edn, 1864. Articles Agricultura, Astronomy, Cicero, Juvenalis, Lucilius, Lucretius, etc., in (Sir) William Smith's Dictionaries (1842-3). George Rawlinson See bibliography to chap. xiv, ante James Riddell (1823-1866) Plato, Apology, with a Digest of Platonic Idioms. Oxford, 1867. Homer, Odyssey, begun by R., continued by Merry, W. W. (1876), and completed by Monro, D. B. (1901). Henry John Roby Elementary Latin Grammar, 1862; A Grammar of the Latin Language, 1871; Latin Grammar for Schools, 1880; Latin Grammar from Plautus to Suetonius, 2 vols., 1871-4, etc. Report of the Schools Inquiry Commission, chapters II (On the present state of Schools for Secondary Education) and Iv (The law of Charities as affecting Endowed Schools), 1868-9. An Introduction to the Study of Justinian's Digest, 2 vols., 1884; Italian transl., Florence, 1886. Roman Private Law in the times of Cicero and the Antonines, 2 vols., 1902. Essays on the Law in Cicero's Private Orations, 1902. Roman Law, chapter iiI, in vol. ii of The Cambridge Medieval History, 1913. Martin Joseph Routh See bibliography to chap. xII, ante William Gunion Rutherford Elementary Accidence of Attic Greek. 1878. First Greek Grammar (Accidence and Syntax). 1891. The New Phrynichus, being a revised text of the Ecloga of the Grammarian Phrynichus, with introduction and commentary. 1881. Babrius, with introductory dissertations, critical notes, commentary and lexicon. 1883. The Fourth Book of Thucydides, a revision of the text, illustrating the principal causes of corruption in the MSS of this author. 1889. The Mimiambi of Herondas. 1892. Scholia Aristophanica. 3 vols. 1896-1905. St Paul's Epistle to the Romans, translated. 1900. I

1Y 7 * 7 7 7

xvJ (c/asszcal Oczo/ars 493 John Young Sargent (1829-1915) Easy passages for translation into Latin. Oxford, 1867; 8th edn, 1899. Materials and models for Latin and Greek prose Composition, with Dallin, T. F., 1870; Greek separated from Latin, 1878. Outlines of Norwegian Grammar, 1865; Dano-Norwegian Grammar and Reader, 1892. Sir John Robert Seeley (1834-1895) Livy, bk I, with introduction etc. Oxford, 1871. See, also, bibliography to chapter on Historians, etc. in vol. xiv. William Young Sellar Roman Poets of the Republic. Oxford, 1863. Roman Poets of the Augustan Age: Virgil, 1877, etc. Horace and the Elegiac Poets, with memoir by Lang, Andrew. 1892. George Augustus Simcox (1841-1905) Thirteen Satires of Juvenal. 1867 and 1873. History of Latin Literature from Ennius to Boethius. 2 vols. 1883. Prometheus unbound, a tragedy. 1867. William Henry Simcox (1843-1889) The History of Tacitus, ed. 2 vols. 1875-6. With Simeox, G. A. Orations of Demosthenes and Aeschines On the Crown. 1872. Richard Shilleto Demosthenes, De Falsa Legatione, 1844; 4th edn, 1874. Thucydides, I, 1872; ii, 1880. Thucydides or Grote? Cambridge, 1851. Answered in A few remarks...by J[ohn] G[rote], ib. 1851. Collected Versions. Cambridge, 1901. Evelyn Shirley Shuckburgh (1843-1906) History of Rome to the Battle of Actium, 1894. History of Rome for beginners, 1897. Short History of the Greeks, 1901. Greece from the coming of the Hellenes to A.D. 14, 1905. The Bacchae of Euripides in English verse, Cambridge, 1871. Polybius, translated into English, 2 vols., 1889. Cicero's Letters, translated into English, 4 vols., 1899 -1900. Life of Augustus, 1903. Herodotus, v (1890), vi (1889), vII (1893), ix (1893), with English notes. Lysiae Orationes xvi, 1882, etc. Terence, Hautontimorumenos, 1877 and 1911. Horace, Epistles, book i, 1888. Ovid, Heroides, 1879; Tristia I, II, 1895. Cicero, De Am. and De Sen., 1885-6. Caesar, de bello Gallico, I-vI, 1899. Cornelius Nepos, 3 vols., 1895-7. Suetonius, Life of Augustus, 1896. Sidney's Apology for Poetry, 1891. Lives of Dr Farmer and Dr Chadderton, 1884. History of Emmanuel College, Cambridge, 1904. Sir William Smith (1813-1893) School History of Greece. 1854, etc. Latin and English Dictionary, based upon the Works of Forcellini and Freund. 1855, etc. Editor of Dictionaries of Greek and Roman Antiquities, 1842, etc.; edd. Wayte and Marindin, 2 vols., 1890; smaller edn, 1845, etc.; of Biography and Mythology, 3 vols., 1844-9, and Geography, 2 vols., 1857; and of Dictionaries of the Bible, 3 vols., 1863 (Concise Dict., with Wright, W. Aldis, 1865); and of Christian Antiquities, 2 vols., 1875-80; and of Christian Biography, 4 vols., 1877-87; New Classical Dictionary of Biography, Mythology, and Geography, 1850, etc., 1866; Smaller Classical Dict., 1852, etc. Also, textbooks of Latin and Greek grammar, and of history, including The Student's Gibbon, 1857, etc. With Grove, (Sir) George: Classical and Biblical Atlas, 1874.494 Biliography [CH. William Hepworth Thompson Butler, W. Archer. Lectures on the History of Greek Philosophy, ed. 1855. Plato's Phaedrus, 1868, and Gorgias, 1871. On the genuineness of the Sophist of Plato and on some of its philosophical bearings, Trans. of Cambr. Philos. Soc. x (1858), 146 if., rptd in Journ. of Philol. vol. viii (1879), 290 ff. Platonica-Isocratea in Journ. of Class. and Sacred Philol. vol. iv; Aristophanica and Platonica in Journ. of Philol. vol. Iv; On the Philebus, and Euripides, ib. vol. xI; Aristophanes, Nubes, and Babriana, ib. vol. xn. John Horne Tooke "Ewc. rra poevTa or the Diversions of Purley. 2 vols. 1786,1798,1815. Jonathan Toup (1713-1785) Emendationes in Suidam et Hesychium, 4 vols., 1760-6 (1799); Epistola Critica (de Suida), 1767; Curae Novissimae in Suidam, 1775. Dionysii Longini quae supersunt, Graece et Latine. Oxford, 1778. Thomas Twining (1735-1804) Aristotle's Treatise on Poetry, transl. with notes and dissertations, 1789; 1812 and 1849; Cambridge, 1825; Dublin, 1831. Robert Yelverton Tyrrell Hesperidum Susurri (with Brady, T. J. B. and Cullinan, M. C.), 1867. Dublin translations into Greek and Latin verse, ed. 1882. Echoes of Kottabos (with Sullivan, Sir E.), 1906. Euripides, Bacchae, 1871 and 1892; Troades, 1881; 2nd edn, 1885. Aristophanes, Acharnians in English verse, 1883. Sophocles, in Parnassus Library, 1897. Essays on Greek literature, 1909. Plautus, Miles Gloriosus, 2nd edn, 1896. Terence, Oxford, 1902. Lectures on Latin poetry, 1893. Anthology of Latin poetry, 1901. Correspondence of Cicero, vols. i, in, Dublin, 1879-86; vols. Iii-vii (with Purser, L. C.), 1890-1900; Cicero in his Letters, 2nd edn, 1896. Trinity College, Dublin: speeches of public orators, 1808-1908 (Palmer, A., Tyrrell, R. Y., Purser, L. C.). Ed. 1909. Robert Yelverton Tyrrell, by Purser, L. C. Proc. of the British Academy, vol. vII. 1907. Thomas Tyrwhitt (1730-1786) Diss. de Babrio, 1776. Conjectanea in Strabonem, 1783. Isaei orat. de Meneclis hereditate, ed. 1785. Aristotelis de poetica, ed. Oxford, 1794, 1806-17; etc. William Veitch (1794-1885) Greek Verbs, Irregular and Defective. 1848; Oxford, 1865, 1871. Arthur Woollgar Verrall Aeschylus, Septem contra Thebas, 1887; Agamemnon, 1889,1903; Choephori. 1893; Eumenides, 1908. Euripides, Medea, 1881, etc.; Ion, 1890. Euripides the Rationalist, 1895. Four Plays of Euripides (Andromache, Helen, Heracles, Orestes), 1905. The Bacchants, 1910. Studies in Horace. 1883. Collected Studies in Greek and Latin Scholarship, edd. Bayfield, M. A. and Duff, J. D., 1913. Collected Literary Essays, Classical and Modern, with a memoir, 1913. Lectures on Dryden, 1914.xv] Classical Scholars 495 William Vincent (1739-1815) The Voyage of Nearchus from the Indus to the Euphrates, 1797. The Periplus of the Erythraean Sea, 2 vols., 1800-5. The Commerce and Navigation of the Ancients in the Indian Ocean, 2 vols., 1807; 3 vols., 1809. Gilbert Wakefield Sylva Critica, 5 vols. Cambridge, 1789-95. Horatii q. s. rec. et notis instr. 2 vols. 1794. Trag. delectus (Eur., Here., Ale.; Soph., Trach., Phil.; Aesch., Eum.). 1794. Bionis et Moschi Td XECCava em. et ill. 1795. Virgilii opera em. et ill. 2 vols. 1796. Lucretii de rerum natura...rec. ill. 3 vols. 1796. (Glasgow, 1813; London, 1821.) In Euripidis Hecubam Londini nuper editam diatriba extemporalis. 1797. Animadversiones ad Aeschyli tres priores tragoedias. Jena, 1794-9. Dio Chrysostomus, select essays translated. 1800. Noctes Carcerariae. 1801. Memoirs. 2 vols. 1792(1804). Correspondence with C. J. Fox. 1813. George Charles Winter Warr (1845-1901) Echoes of Hellas (including the Tale of Troy, 1883, and the Story of Orestes 1886). The Greek Epic, 1895. Transl. Teuffel's History of Roman Literature, 1890. William Wayte (1829-1898) Plato, Protagoras, 1854; 2nd edn, 1871. Demosthenes, against Androtion and Timocrates, 1882. Edward Charles Wickham (1834-1910) Horace, vol. I, ed. 1874; vol. II, 1893; Horace for English readers, 1903. Augustus Samuel Wilkins Cicero, De Oratore, I, II, III. Oxford, 1879-92, etc. Ciceronis Rhetorica. Oxford text, 1901-3. The Orations of Cicero against Catilina, ed. after Halm, K. 1870, etc. Revised 1894. The Epistles of Horace (including Ars Poetica), ed. with notes. 1885, etc. Prize Essays: The Light of the World (London and Cambridge, 1869, 1870), Phoenicia and Israel (1871), and National Education in Greece (1873). Articles in new edn of Smith's Diet. of Antiquities. Chapter on Education in Cambridge Companion to Greek Studies, and sketch of Roman Education, Cambridge, 1905. Translated with England, E. B.: Curtius, G., Principles of Greek Etymology (1875), and the Greek Verb (1880). Henry Musgrave Wilkins (c. 1822-1887) Demosthenes, Olynthiacs, 1860. Speeches from Thucydides, transl. 1870. Notes for Latin Lyrics, 1851, etc. A Manual of Latin prose (1857) and of Greek prose composition, 1858; etc. Christopher Wordsworth, bishop of Lincoln Athens and Attica. 1836. Greece, pictorial, descriptive, and historical. 1839. Theocritus, 1844 and 1877. Conjectural Emendations of Passages in Ancient Authors, with other papers. 1883. The New Testament... in the Original Greek, with Notes and Introductions. 2 vols. 1859; 4th-5th edn, 1866.496

Bibliography

[CH.

John Wordsworth (1843-1911), bishop of Salisbury Fragments and Specimens of Early Latin, with introductions and notes, Oxford, 1874. With White, H. J.: Novum Testamentum Latine, secundum editionem S. Hieronymi; The Gospels, 1898; The Acts, 1890; etc. II. CLASSICAL ARCHAEOLOGISTS (Including Travellers) James Theodore Bent (1852-1897) The Cyclades: or Life among the Insular Greeks, 1885. The Ruined Cities of Mashonaland, 1892. The Sacred City of the Ethiopians, 1893. With Mrs Bent: Southern Arabia, Soudan and Sokoto, 1900. Robert Burn (1829-1904) Rome and the Campagna, 1871. Old Rome, 1880. Roman Literature in relation to Roman Art, 1888. Richard Chandler Elegiaca Graeca. 1759. Marmora Oxoniensia. Oxford, 1763. Ionian Antiquities. 2 vols. 1769-97, published by Soc. of Dilettanti, who added a third vol. in 1840. Inscriptiones Antiquae plerumque nondum editae. Oxford, 1774. Travels in Asia Minor. 1775. Travels in Greece. 1776. History of Ilium [maintaining the accuracy of Homer's geography]. 1803. Henry Fynes Clinton Fasti Hellenici. Oxford, 1824-34; 3rd edn, 1841. Fasti Romani. Ib. 1845-50. An epitome of the civil and literary chronology of Greece. 1853. Chronology of Rome and Constantinople, completed and edited by Clinton, C. J. Fynes. 1854. Autobiography in Literary Remains. 1854. John Anthony Cramer (1793-1848) Dissertation on Hannibal's passage of the Alps [by the Little St Bernard]. 1820. (Anon.) Geographical and historical description of ancient Italy, 1826; Greece, 1828; and Asia Minor, 1832. Anecdota Graeca from MSS of Oxford, 1834-7, and Paris, 1839-41. Edward Dodwell A Classical and Topographical Tour through Greece, 2 vols., 1819; German transl., 1821. Views in Greece, with thirty coloured plates, 1821. Views and Descriptions of Cyclopian or Pelasgic Remains in Italy and Greece, London and Paris, with French text, 1834. Robert Ellis (1820-1885) Treatise on Hannibal's passage of the Alps [by the Little Mont Cenis], 1853. Articles in Journal of Classical and Sacred Philology, 1855-6, vol. II, 308-329, vol. III, 1-34; Ancient Routes between Italy and Gaul, Cambridge, 1867; etc. Sir Charles Fellows A Journal written during an Excursion in Asia Minor. 1839. More recent Discoveries in Lycia, being a Journal kept during a Second Excursion in Asia Minor. 1841. Also, popular editions of the above, entitled Travelsxv] Classical Archaeologists 497 and Researches in Asia Minor, particularly in the Province of Lycia. 1852. The Xanthian Marbles: their Acquisition and Transmission to England. 1843. An Account of the Ionic Trophy Monument excavated at Xanthus. 1848. Coins of ancient Lycia before the reign of Alexander; with an Essay on the Relative Dates of the Lycian Monuments in the British Museum. 1855. Life in Brown, C., Lives of Nottinghamshire Worthies (1882), pp. 352 if., and in Journal of Royal Geographical Society, 1861. Sir William Gell Topography of Troy and its Vicinity. 1804, 1807. Geography and Antiquities of Ithaca. 1807. Itinerary of Greece, with a Commentary on Pausanias and Strabo. 1810. Enlarged edn. 1827. Itinerary of the Morea. 1816. Republished as Narrative of a Journey in the Morea. 1823. Pompeiana: the Topography, Edifices and Ornaments of Pompeii. In two parts. 1817, 1832. Barclay Vincent Head (1844-1914) History of the Coinage of Syracuse, 1874; of Lydia and Persia, 1877; of Ephesus, 1880; of Boeotia, 1881. Guide to the Coins of the Ancients. 1881. listoria Numorun. Oxford, 1887; new edn, 1911. Catalogues of Greek Coins in British Museum. 10 vols. 1873-1906. Charles WTilliam King Antique Gems, 1860; new edn in 2 vols., 1872. The Gnostics and their Remains, Ancient and Mediaeval, 1864; 2nd edn, 1887. The Natural History of Precious Stones and Gems, and the Precious Metals, 1865. Illustrations in King and Munro's Horace, 1869. The Hand-book of Engraved Gents, 1866; 2nd edn, 1885. The Natural History of Precious Stones and Precious Metals, 1867; new edn, 1870. Catalogue of Col. Leake's Engraved Gems, 1870. Early Christian Numismatics, and other Antiquarian Tracts, 1873. Transl. of Plutarch's Morals, Theosophical Essays. 1882. Transl. of Julian's Theosophical Works, etc., 1888. William John Law (1787-1869) On Hannibal's passage of the Alps [by the Little St Bernard]. 1855-66. Sir Austen Henry Layard Nineveh and its Remains; Researches and Discoveries in Ancient Assyria, 2 vols., 1848; 6th edn, 1850. The Monuments of Nineveh, 1850. Popular Account of Layard's Expedition to Nineveh, 1851. Fresh Discoveries at Nineveh, and Researches at Babylon, 1853; Illustrations of the Sculptures, Vases, and Bronzes recently discovered at Nineveh, 1853. William iMartin Leake Researches in Greece. 1814. Topography of Athens and the Demi. 1821; 2nd edn, 1841. Journal of a Tour in Asia Minor. 1824. Travels in Northern Greece, 1835-41; in Morea, 1830. Peloponnesiaca. 1846. Numismata Hellenica. 1859. Memoir by Marsden, J. H., 1864; notice by Curtius, E., in Alterthum und Gegenwart, vol. II, 305-322.

E. L. XII.

32498 Bibliography [CH. Sir George Cornewall Lewis Transl. of Boeckh's Public Economy of Athens and Dissertation on the Silver Mines of Laurium, 1828; 2nd edn, 1842. Transl. of part of K. 0. Miiller's Dorians, 2 vols., 1830; 2nd edn, 1839; and earlier portion of his History of Greek Literature, 1840-2. On the Origin and Formation of the Romance Languages, 1835. Babrius, ed. G. C. L., 1846; part II [a modern Greek forgery], 1859. An Enquiry into the Credibility of Early Roman History. 2 vols. 1855. An Historical Survey of the Astronomy of the Ancients. 1862. John Henry Middleton (1846-1896) Remains of Ancient Rome. 1885; revised and enlarged edn, 1892. The Engraved Gems of Classical Times, with a Catalogue of Gems in the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge. 1898. The Lewis Collection of Gems and Rings in the possession of Corpus Christi College, Cambridge. 1892. William Mw1uir (1799-1860) Journal of a Tour in Greece and in the Ionian Islands. Edinburgh, 1842. A critical history of the language and literature of Ancient Greece. 5 vols. 1850-7. Alexander Stuart Murray (1841-1904) Manual of Mythology. 1873. History of Greek Sculpture. 2 vols. 1880-3. Handbook of Greek Archaeology. 1892. Excavations in Cyprus. 1900. Terra-cotta Sarcophagi (1898), White Athenian Vases (1896), and Designs from Greek Vases (1894). Greek Bronzes (monograph for The Portfolio). 1898. Sir Charles Thomas ANewton History of Discoveries at Halicarnassus, Cnidus, and Branchidae. 2 vols. 1862-3. Travels and Discoveries in the Levant. 2 vols. 1865. Essays in Art and Archaeology. 1880. The collection of Ancient Greek Inscriptions of the British Museum. Part iI. 1883. John Henry Parker (1806-1884) Glossary of Terms used in Grecian, Roman, Italian, and Gothic Architecture. 5th edn, enlarged, 3 vols. Oxford, 1850. The Archaeology of Rome. 1874-6. Francis Cranmer Penrose An Investigation of the Principles of Grecian Architecture. 1851-2; enlarged, 1888. Reginald Stuart Poole (1832-1895) Horae Egyptiacae, or The Chronology of Ancient Egypt. 1851. Cities of Egypt. 1882. Coins of the Ptolemies, Kings of Egypt. 1883. Coins of the Shahs of Persia, etc. 1888. Articles on Egypt, Hieroglyphics, Numismatics, etc., in Enc. Brit., 8th edn. (Sir) R. Afurdoch Smith and E. A. Porcher History of the recent discoveries at Cyrene. 1864. Thomas Abel Brimage Spratt With Forbes, Edward: Travels in Lycia, Milyas, and The Cibyratis... 2 vols. 1846. Travels and Researches in Crete. 2 vols. 1865.xv] Classical Archaeologists 499 James Stuart (1713-1788) and Nicholas Revett (1720-1804) Antiquities of Athens. Publ. by Soc. of Dilettanti: vol. I, 1762; ii, 1787-8; iiI, 1794; iv, 1814 (cf. Cust, Lionel, and Colvin, (Sir) Sidney, History of the Society of Dilettanti, 1898, pp. 101-3). III. ORIENTAL SCHOLARS Arabic Scholars Keith-Falconer, Ion Grant Neville (1856-1887). Transl. Syriac version of the Fables of Bidpai. 1886; etc. Lane, Edward William. Modern Egyptians. 1836. - Translation of The Arabian Nights, with notes and illustrations. 1838-40. Selections from the Kur-an. 1843. - Arabic Lexicon, 5 parts, 1863-74; followed by 3 parts ed. by LanePoole, S. Palmer, Edward Henry. Oriental Mysticism. 1867. The Desert of the Exodus. 2 vols. 1871. Catalogue of Arabic, Persian, and Turkish MSS in library of Trinity college. Cambridge, 1871. Grammar of the Arabic Language. 1874. Arabic Manual. 1881. A simplified Grammar of Hindustani, Persian, and Arabic. 1882. Concise Persian-English Dictionary. 1876; 2nd edn, 1884. Concise English-Persian Dictionary, etc. 1883. Transl. of the Poems of Beha-ed-din Zoheir of Egypt. Cambridge, 1876-7. Transl. of the Qur'an. Oxford, 1880. Life of Haroun Alraschid. 1880. Strong, Sandford Arthur (1863-1904). Publ. Arabic text on conquest of Abyssinia, 1894; and Pali text of Maha-bodhi-vafnsa, 1891. Wright, William. Catalogue of Syriac MSS in British Museum. 3 parts. 1870-2. Ed. Book of Kalilah and Dimnah. 1883. Arabic Grammar, 1859. Travels of Ibn Jubair, 1852. Opuscula Arabica, 1859. Kamil of Al-Mubarrad, 1864-82. Assyriologists Hincks, Edward. Papers on Assyriology in the Transactions of the Royal Irish Academy, 1846, 1847, 1850, 1852, 1853, 1855, 1865. Rawlinson, Major-General Sir Henry Creswicke. The Persian Cuneiform Inscription at Behistun, 1846-51, and Outline of the History of Assyria, 1852 (both reprinted from the Journals of the Asiatic Society). A Commentary on the Cuneiform Inscriptions of Babylon and Assyria. 1850. Notes on the Early History of Babylonia. 1854. Cuneiform Inscriptions of Western Asia. 3 vols. 1861 ff. Memoir by his brother, Rawlinson, George. 1898. Smith, George. Annals of Assurbanipal, translated from the Cuneiform Inscriptions. 1871. The Phonetic Values of the Cuneiform Characters. 1871. Assyrian Discoveries on the Site of Nineveh (in 1873-4); three editions in 1875. The Assyrian Eponym Canon from the death of Solomon to Nebuchadnezzar. 1875. Assyria from the earliest times to the fall of Nineveh. 1875. The Chaldaean Account of Genesis. 1875; new edn, by Sayce, A. H., 1880. Papers on The Early History of Babylonia, and The decipherment of the Cypriote inscriptions, and translation of The Chaldaean account of the Deluge, in Trans. of the Society of Biblical Archaeology, 1871 ff. History of Babylonia, 1877, and Sennacherib, 1878, ed. Sayce, A. H. 32-2500

Bibliography

[CH.

Chinese Scholars Davis, Sir John Francis (1795-1890). The Fortunate Union, transl. of a Chinese novel, 1829, and other translations of Chinese poetical literature. The Chinese, a general description of China and its inhabitants, 1840. Sketches of China, 2 vols., 1841. Legge, James. Translation of the whole Confucian Canon in The Sacred Books of the East, 1879, 1882; and also of Some Taoist Classics, 1891; 2nd edn, 1893. Medhurst, Walter Henry. A Chinese-English and English-Chinese dictionary, 1842-3. Translation of the Bible. China: its state and prospects. 1890. Morrison, Robert. Dictionary of the Chinese language, 1815-23. Translation of the Bible, with the collaboration of Milne, William, 1818. Wade, Sir Thomas Francis. Hsin Ching Lu, 4 vols., Hong Kong, 1859. Course of Colloquial Chinese, 4 vols., 1867. Specimens of Documentary Chinese, 1867. Egyptologists Birch, Samuel. Hieroglyphical Grammar and Dictionary, and Translation of the Book of the Dead, in Bunsen's Egypt's Place in History, vol. v, 1867. - History of Ancient Pottery, Egyptian, Assyrian, Greek, Etruscan, Roman (1858); new and revised edn, 1873; enlarged by Walters, H. B., 1905. History of Egypt, 1875. The monumental history of Egypt, 1876. Ed. Records of the Past; English transl. of Assyrian and Egyptian monuments. 12 vols. 1873-81. Egyptian texts of the earliest period. 1887. Gliddon, George Robins (1809-1857). Memoir on the Cotton of Egypt. 1841. Appeal to the Antiquaries of Europe on the Destruction of the Monuments of Egypt. 1841. Discourses on Egyptian Archaeology. 1841. Ancient Egypt. 1850; 2nd edn, 1853. With Nott, J. C.: Types of Mankind, 1854; and Indigenous Races of the Earth, 1857. Renouf, Sir Peter le Page (1822-1897). Hibbert Lectures on The Religion of the Egyptians. 1879. Translation of the Book of the Dead, in Proceedings of the Society of Biblical Archaeology. 1892 f. Wilkinson, Sir John Gardner (1797-1875). Materia Hieroglyphica. Malta, 1828. Extracts from several Hieroglyphical Subjects. Ib. 1830. Topographical Survey of Thebes. 1830. The Topography of Thebes and General Survey of Egypt. 1835; enlarged edn, 1843, Modern Egypt and Thebes, reissued in Mlurray's series. 1884. - Manners and Customs of the Ancient Egyptians, 3 vols., 1837; 2nd edn, 1842; second series, 3 vols., 1841; both series, 5 vols., 1847; new edn, revised by Birch, S., 3 vols., 1878. -- rchitecture of Ancient Egypt. 1850. -- Facsimile of the Turin Papyrus. 1851. A Popular Account of the Ancient Egyptians. 1854. Greek Testament Scholars Alford, Henry. The Greek Testament, in 4 vols. 1849-61. - Transl. of the Odyssey in blank verse. 1861. Ellicott, Charles John, bp of Gloucester and Bristol. Commentaries on Pauline Epistles, 1854-8, etc.; and on the complete Bible, 3 vols., 1897.xv]

Oriental Scholars

501

Lightfoot, Joseph Barber, bp of Durham. St Paul's Epistle to the Galatians, 1865; 10th edn, 1890; The Epistle to the Philippians, 1868, etc.; to the Colossians and to Philemon, 1875, etc. - St Clement of Rome, (a) The two Epistles to the Corinthians, 1869; (b) Appendix containing the newly recovered portions, 1877. The Apostolic Fathers. 1885-91. On a Fresh Revision of the English New Testament, 1871; etc. Moulton, William Fiddian (1835-1898). Transl. Winer's Grammar of New Testament Greek, Edinburgh, 1870; 2nd edn, 1877. History of the English Bible, 1878; 5th edn, 1911; etc. Scrivener, Frederick Henry Ambrose. A plain introduction to the criticism of the New Testament, Cambridge, 1861; Novum Testamentum Graecum (1550)... Cambridge, 1860; An exact Transcript of the Codex Augiensis, 1859, and edition of Codex Bezae, Cambridge, 1864; etc. Tregelles, Samuel Prideaux. The Book of Revelation, edited from ancient authorities. 1844. Account of the Printed Text of the Greek New Testament... 1854. The Greek New Testament, Matthew to Philemon. 1870. Wordsworth, Christopher. See sect. I, ante. 5Hebraists Davidson, Andrew Bruce. Hebrew Grammar, 1874, and Syntax, 1894. Commentaries in The Cambridge Bible on Job, 1884; Ezekiel, 1892; Nahum, Habakkuk, Zephaniah, 1902. Driver, Samuel Rolles. Isaiah: his Life and Times. 1892. An Introduction to the Literature of the Old Testament. 1900. Commentaries on Deuteronomy, Joel and Amos, Daniel, and Exodus in The Cambridge Bible, 1897-1911; on Genesis in The Westminster Commentaries, 1911; on the Minor Prophets in The Century Bible, 1905; Leviticus, 1894-8; Job, 1905; Jeremiah, 1906. Part I of Hogarth's Authority and Archaeology, 1889. Modern Research as illustrating the Bible, 1909. Joint editor of A Hebrew-English Lexicon, based on Gesenius, 1906. - The ideals of the Prophets, 1915; with 12 pages of complete bibliography in appendix. Field, Frederick. Homilies by St Chrysostom, 3 vols., Cambridge, 1839 and 7 vols., 1849-62. Origen's Hexapla, new edn, Oxford, 1875. Vetus Testamentum ex Versione Septuaginta Interpretum secundum Codicem Alexandrinum. Otium Norvicense, sive Tentamen de Reliquiis Aquilae, Symmachi, Theodotionis, e lingua Syriaca in Graecam convertendis, 3 vols., Oxford, 1864-81. Notes on Select Passages of the Greek Testament, Oxford, 1881. Ginsburg, Christian David. The Yiassorah. 3 vols. 1880 f. Commentaries on The Song of Songs, Ecclesiastes, 1857; Leviticus, 1882. The Karaites, 1862. The Essenes, 1864. The Kabbalah, 1865. The Moabite Stone, 1870. Introduction to the Hebrew Bible, 1896; and to the Iassoretico-critical edn, 1897; etc. Lee, Samuel. A Hebrew Grammar, 1830; 6th edn, 1844. The Book of Job, transl. from the Hebrew, 1837. Hebrew, Chaldaic, and English Lexicon, 1840; 3rd edn, 1844; etc. Mason, Peter Hamnett. An Easy Practical Hebrew Grammar... 2 vols. 1853. A New Elementary Hebrew Grammar, pt I, 1871; new edns, 1877 and 1883. Hebrew Exercise Book, 1874. Rabbinic Reading Book, 1880. Pusey, Edward Bouverie. See bibliography to chap. xii, ante. Taylor, Charles. The Gospel in the Law, 1869. The Dirge of Coheleth in Ecclesiastes xii, discussed and literally interpreted, 1874. The Sayings502

Bibliography

[CH.

of the Jewish Fathers, 1877; 2nd edn, 1897; Appendix, 1900. The Teaching of the Twelve Apostles, 1886. An Essay on the Theology of the Didache, 1889. The witness of Hermas to the Four Gospels, 1892. The Oxyrhynchus Logia, 1899. (Also works on Conic Sections.) Wright, William Aldis. A concise dictionary of the Bible, 1865. The Bible Word-Book, 1866; 2nd edn, 1884. A Commentary on the Book of Job from a Hebrew M.S in the University Library, Cambridge. 1909. [His collection of documents connected with the Revised Version of the Old Testament and Apocrypha was presented to the university library in 1908.] See, also, Shakespeare bibliography in vol. v, ante. Persian Scholars Ouseley, Sir William. Persian Miscellanies, 1795. Oriental Collections, 1797-1800. History of Persia, 1799. The Oriental Geography of Ebn Hankal, 1801. Travels in Persia, 3 vols., 1819-23. Ouseley Sir Gore. Biographical Notices of Persian Poets. 1846. Sans,rit Scholars Bendall, Cecil (1856-1906). Catalogue of the Buddhist Sanskrit MSS in the.: University Library, Cambridge. 1883. A Journey of Literary and Archaeological Research in Nepal and Northern India (1884-5). Cambridge, 1886. Burnell, Arthur Coke (1840-1882). Treatises on Indian law, translations from the Sanskrit, and linguistic and historical tracts. [His collection of Sanskrit MSS is now in the library of the India Office.] Carey, William. Sanscrit Grammar, 1806; Bengali-English Dictionary, 3 vols., 1815-25, abridged by Marshman, J., 1827; Ramayana, ed. and transl., 1806-10. Childers, Robert Caesar (1838-1876). Ed. Pali texts, 1867-74; Pali dictionary, 1872-5. Colebrooke, Henry Thomas. Completed Digest of Indian Law, left unfinished by Sir William Jones. 3 vols. Calcutta, 1797. London, 1801. Collection of Compositions in Sanskrit, Calcutta, 1804; Grammar, 1805; Dictionary, 1808, etc. Cowell, Edward Byles. Transl. Kalidasas Vikramorvasi, an Indian drama. 1851. The Prakrita-Prakafsa; first complete edn, 1854, 2nd edn, 1868. Short Introduction to the ordinary Prakrit of the Sanscrit Dramas. 1875. Rig Veda Sanhita, vols. Iv, v, vi, 1866-70; etc. Life and Letters, by Cowell, George. With appendix on the history of Sanskrit studies. 1904. Griffith, Ralph Thomas Hotchkin (1826-1906). Transi. of the R'amayan of VYalmiki. 5 vols. 1870-5. Jones, Sir William. Persian Grammar. 1771. Poeseos Asiaticae Commentariorum Libri Sex. 1774. Transl. of the Arabic Moallakat. 1783. - Transl. of the Hitopadesa and Sakuntala, and extracts from the Vedas. - The Institutes of Hindu Law, or Ordinances of Ianu. [Beginning.] - Collected Works, ed. Teignmouth, Lord, 1799, rptd 1807. Max Miiller, Friedrich. A History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature...1859: 2nd edn, 1860. - Lectures on the Science of Language. 2 vols. 1861-4; 9th edn, 1882. A Sanskrit Grammar for Beginners. 1866; 2nd edn, 1870. Chips from a German Work-shop. 4 vols. 1867-75. - The Stratification of Language. Rede Lecture. 1868.xv]

Oriental Scholars

503

Max Miiller, Friedrich. Buddhist Nihilism. 1869. - ig-Yeda-Sanhita: the Sacred Hymns of the Brahmins... trans]. and explained. 1869. - The Hymns of the Rig-Veda, 2 vols., 1873; 2nd edn, 1877. -- Introduction to the Science of Religion. 1875. - The Origin and Growth of Religion, as illustrated by the Religions of India (Hibbert Lectures), 1878; new edn, 1879. -Sacred Books of the East. Vols. i, x, xv, xxv, xxix. Oxford, 1879-87. -- Anecdota Oxoniensia, three pts, 1881, 1884, 1885. India: What can it teach us? (Cambridge Lectures.) 1883. Biographical Essays. 1884. The Science of Thought. 1887. Biographies of Words, and the Home of the Aryas. 1888. Monier-Williams, Sir Monier. Elementary Grammar of the Sanskrit Language, 1846; 2nd edn, Practical Grammar. Oxford, 1857; 1864. - English-Sanskrit Dictionary. 1851. Sakuntala, ed. and transl. Hertford, 1853; trans]. 6th edn 1894.  Story of Nala. 1860. -Sanskrit-English Dictionary. 1872; new edn, 1899. Also works on the study of Hindustani. Strong, Sandford Arthur. See Arabic Scholars. Wilkins, Sir Charles. The Bhagvat-Geta, transl. 1785. The Heetopades, transl. Bath, 1787. The Story of... Sakoontala, transl. from the Mahaibharat.a. 1795. Grammar of the Sanskrita Language. 1808. Wilson, Horace Hayman. The iMgha Data, or Cloud Messenger, with transl. in English verse. Calcutta, 1813, etc. Sanscrit-English Dictionary. Calcutta, 1819; 2nd edn, 1832. Hindu Theatre. 3 vols. Calcutta, 1827, etc. The Vishnu Purana, transl. 1840; new edn, 1867-70. Ariana Antiqua, a Descriptive Account of the Antiquities and Coins of Afghanistan. 1841. Introduction to Sanskrit Grammar. 1841. Rig-Veda Sanhita, transl.: vol. i, 1850; new edn, 1868, II, 1854, II, 1857; completed by Cowell, E. B.; Iv, 1866, v-vi, 1870. Collective edn of Works. 12 vols. 1862-71. Syriac Scholars Bensly, Robert Lubbock. Syriac Bible; Hebrews, Cambridge, 1889; Gospels, ib. 1894; iv Maccabees, ed. Barnes, E. W., ib. 1894; Clemens Romanus, ed. Kennett, R. H., ib. 1899. Cureton, William. The Antient Syriac Version of the Epistles of St Ignatius, with Transl. and Notes, 1845; Vindiciae Ignatianae, 1846; Corpus Ignatianum, 1849; Spicilegium Syriacum, 1855; Remains of a very Antient Revision of the Four Gospels in Syriac, 1858; History of the Martyrs in Palestine, from Eusebius, 1861; Ancient Syriac documents... 1864; also Syriac texts, etc. Smith, Robert Payne. Syriac transl. of Cyril's Commentary on St Luke's Gospel. 1858. Transl. of Syriac text of Part iii of the Ecclesiastical History of Eusebius. 1860. Latin Catalogue of Syriac MSS in the Bodleian. Thesaurus Syriacus. 1879-1901. Commentaries on Genesis (1885), Daniel (1886), etc. Turkish Scholars Gibb, Elias John Wilkinson. Ottoman prose and verse, transl. 1879-84. History of Ottoman poetry, vol. I, 1900; vols. II-vi, ed. Browne, E. G., 1902-9. [Many of his books were bequeathed to the university library, Cambridge.]504 Bibliography [CH. Redhouse, Sir James William. Turkish Vade-Mecum, 1855, 1877, 1882; English and Turkish dictionary, 1856-7,1884, 1887. A dictionary, English and Turkish, and Turkish and English, 1856; 2nd edn, 1880. Turkish and English lexicon, Constantinople, 1890. On the History, System, and Varieties of Turkish Poetry, 1879. Simplified grammar, 1884. The Mesnevi of Mevlana, Bk i, transl., 1881. [MS of ten vols. of Arabic, Persian, Turkish, and English dictionary, in library of British Museum.] IV. ENGLISH SCHOLARS Arnold, Thomas (junior), (1823-1900). Ed. the English works of Wiclif (for Rolls series), 3 vols., 1869-71. A manual of English literature. 1862. Bosworth, Joseph. Elements of Anglo-Saxon Grammar. 1823. AngloSaxon Dictionary. 1838; abridged, 1848. King Alfred's Orosius, 1856, transl. 1855. Bradshaw, Henry. See sect. vi (b), post. Collins, John Churton (1848-1908). The Study of English Literature. 1891. Ephemera Critica. 1901. Studies in Poetry and Criticism. 1905. Craik, George Lillie (1798-1866). History of English Literature and the English Language. 2 vols. 1861. Earle, John (1824-1903). Anglo-Saxon Literature. 1884. A Handbook to the Land Charters and other Saxon Documents. 1888. English Prose, its Elements, History and Usage. 1890. The Psalter of 1539. 1894. Ellis,Alexander John (1814-1890). On EarlyEnglish Pronunciation. 1869-89. Treatises on philological, mathematical, musical, and other subjects. Furnivall, Frederick James (1825-1910). Founder of the Early English Text society, 1864; extra series, 1867; the Chaucer society, and the Ballad society, 1868; the New Shakspere society, 1873; the Wiclif and the Browning society, 1881; and was a voluminous contributor to nearly all. With Hales, J. W.: Bishop Percy's Folio MS (the Percy Ballads). 3 vols. 1868. See, also, bibliography to chaps. VIII-XII of vol. v, ante. F. J. Furnivall: A volume of personal record. Oxford, 1911. Hales, John Wesley (1836-1914). Milton's Areopagitica. Oxford, 1874; new edn, 1904. Folia litteraria. 1893. See, also, Furnivall, F. J., ante. Kemble, John Mitchell. See, post, bibliography to vol. xiv, chapter on Historians, etc. Latham, Robert Gordon (1812-1888). Revised edn of Johnson's Dictionary, 1870; philological and ethnological works, 1840-78. Lye, Edward. Etymologicumn Anglicanum of Francis Junius, with an Anglo-Saxon Grammar. 1743. Sacrorum Evangeliorum Versio Gothica, with a Gothic Grammar. 1750. Dictionarium Saxonico- et GothicoLatinumn, completed by Manning, Owen. 2 vols., folio. 1772. Macaulay, George Campbell (1852-1915). Francis Beaumont, a study. 1883. The Complete Works of John Gowrer. 4 vols. Oxford, 1899-1902. James Thomson. (English Alen of Letters series.) 1908. Morley, Henry (1822-1894). English Writers, vol. I (before Chaucer), and vol. ii, part I (from Chaucer to Dunbar), 1864-7; recast in 11 vols., last volume (under James I) with Griffin, W. H., 1887-95. A First Sketch of English Literature. 1873, and many later edns. Morris, Richard. Ed. Chaucer, 6 vols., 1866; Prologue, Knighte's Tale, and Nonne Preste's Tale. 2nd edn, 1869. Specimens of Early English. 2 parts, 1866-72; new edn, 1885. Historical Outlines of English Accidence. 1872; 3rd edn, 1875. Ed. Hampole's Pricke of Conscience, 1863; and many works for the Early English Text Society.xv]

English Sc/olars

505

Murray, Lindley (1745-1826). English Grammar. 1795, and nearly 50 later edns. Memoirs of the life and writings of Lindley Murray. Written by himself, with preface by Frank, Elizabeth. York, 1826. Murray, Sir James Augustus Henry (1837-1915). Ed. A New English Dictionary on Historical Principles. Oxford, 1888 fif. The Evolution of English Lexicography. (Romanes Lecture.) Oxford, 1900. Nares, Robert (1753-1829). A Glossary, or Collection of Words, Phrases, etc. which have been thought to require illustration in the Works of English Authors. 1822. Ed. Halliwell(-Phillipps), J. O., and Wright, T. 2 vols. 1859. Nichol, John (1833-1894). Hannibal: a drama. Glasgow, 1873. Byron (English Men of Letters). 1880. Robert Burns. Edinburgh, 1882. Francis Bacon. 2 vols. 1888-9. Carlyle (English Men of Letters). 1892. Skeat, Walter William. Parallel Extracts from MSS of Piers Plowman, 1866; Piers Plowman, in four parts, 1867-84; the Crede, 1867; new edn, 1906; Prologue and Passus I-vnI, 1869, etc. - Moeso-Gothic Glossary, 1868; the Gospel of St Mark in Gothic, 1882; Barbour's Bruce, 1870-89. Specimens of English from 1394 to 1597. 1871, etc. The Four Gospels in Anglo-Saxon and Northumbrian. 1871-87. - ibliographical List of works in English Dialects (with Nodal, J. H.). 1873-7. - Etymological dictionary of the English Language, 1879-82; 4th edn, 1910; Concise Dictionary, 1882, etc.; new edns (rewritten), 1901, 1911. -- Complete Works of Geoffrey Chaucer, 6 vols., 1894; The Student's Chaucer, 1895, in Modern English, 6 vols., 1904-8; also separate editions of particular works, etc. Sweet, Henry (1845-1914). An Anglo-Saxon Reader. Oxford, 1876. A new English Gramnnar. 2 parts. Ib. 1892-8. A Second Anglo-Saxon Reader. Ib. 1887. A Student's Dictionary of Anglo-Saxon. Ib. 1897. Taylor, Isaac (1829-1901). Words and Places, 1864, and later edns. Etruscan Researches, 1874. The Alphabet, 2 vols., 1883. Greeks and Goths, 1879. The Origin of the Aryans (Contemporary Science series), 1897-9. French transl. 1895. The Family Pen. Memorials of the Taylor Family of Ongar. 2 vols. 1867. Thorpe, Benjamin. Rask's Anglo-Saxon Grammar, enlarged and improved. Copenhagen, 1830. - Caedmon's Metrical Paraphrase of parts of the Holy Scriptures, in Anglo-Saxon, with English transl., notes, and verbal index. 1832. Anglo-Saxon Version of the Story of Apollonius of Tyre, with transl. and glossary. 1834. Analecta Anglo-Saxonica. Oxford, 1834; new edns, 1846, 1868. Ancient Laws and Institutes of England (from Ethelbert to Canut) with English transl. 1840. The Gospels in Anglo-Saxon. Oxford, 1842. Codex Exoniensis (of Anglo-Saxon poems, etc.). 1842. The Anglo-Saxon poems of Beowulf, with transl., notes and glossary. Oxford, 1855. - Anglo-Saxon Chronicle. (Rolls series.) 2 vols. 1861. - iplomatarium Anglicum Aevi Saxonici. 1865. Trench, Richard Chenevix. See, ante, bibliography to chapter xnI, and post to vol. xIII, chapter v. Turner, Sharon. See, post, bibliography to vol. xiv, chapter on Historians.506 Bibliography [CH. Wedgwood, Hensleigh (1803-1891). A Dictionary of English Etymology, 1857; 2nd edn, thoroughly revised and enlarged, 1872. Contested Etymologies. 1882. See, also, sect. v (b), post; and for Shakespeare scholars, see the bibliography to vol. v, chapters vII-xnI. V (a). ARCHAEOLOGICAL ANTIQUARIES (i) General Anderson, John Parker. The book of British Topography. 1881. Antiquaries of London, Society of: Archaeologia, or miscellaneous tracts, relating to antiquity, since 1770, and Proceedings, since 1849; Vetusta Monumenta, ancient monuments of Great Britain, 6 vols., 1747-1842; Reports of Excavations at Silchester (1890-1909) in Archaeologia. Archaeologia. See Antiquaries. Archaeological Association, British: Journal, since 1843. Archaeological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland, Royal: Archaeological Journal, since 1844. Archaeological Papers, Index of, 1891, Gomme, (Sir) Laurence; also Papers of 1665-1890; Index, 1907. Archaeological Society, London and Middlesex, founded 1855: Transactions. Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland, Royal, founded 1823. Transactions, 1827-33; Journal, since 1834; Asiatic onographs, since 1802. British School at Athens: Annual. 1894-5, etc. (In progress.) British School at Rome: Papers, 7 vols. 1902, etc. (In progress.) Cambrian Archaeological Association (1846): Archaeologia Cambrensis, Ser. I-vI. Cambridge Antiquarian Society, founded 1840: Proceedings, octavo and quarto series. Cymmodorion, Honourable Society of (1751-1773), revived in 1820: Transactions, etc. Egypt Exploration Fund: Annual Report, since 1882; Archaeological Report, since 1892; Archaeological Survey, Memoirs 1-21; Graeco-Roman Branch, vols. x-XII; Journal, since 1914. Folk-lore Society, founded 1878: Folk-lore Record (1878-82), Folk-lore Journal (1883-9), Folk-lore, since 1890. Gentleman's Magazine Library, The, ed. Gomme, (Sir) Laurence, in 9 parts: (1) Manners and Customs; (2) Dialect and Popular Sayings; (3) Popular Superstitions and Traditions; (4) Archaeology, Geol. and Prehistoric; (5) Archaeology, Roman and Saxon; (6) Archaeology, Anglo-Saxon and Scandinavian; (7) Romano-British Remains, 2 vols.; (8) Literary History; (9) Topography. 1883-1906. Godwin, Henry. The English Archaeologist's Hand-book. 1867. Hellenic Studies, Society for the promotion of: Journal, since 1880. Hotten, John Camden (1832-1873). Handbook to the Topography and Family History of England and Wales. 1870. India, Archaeological Survey of, Annual Reports. Calcutta, 1871, etc. (In progress.) Indian Thibet, Antiquities of, by Franeke, A. H. Part I. Calcutta, 1915. Lancashire and Cheshire Record Society. 62 vols. Edited by Fishwick, H., Earwaker, J. P., and others. 1878-1911. London Topographical Society: London Topographical Record. Vols. I-Ix. 1900, etc. (In progress.) [The Topographical Society of London, from which the L. T. S. was reorganised was founded in 1880.]/1 7 7 7 A

!

xvj.I rchaeologzcal Intzpuarzes 507 Lyell, Arthur H. A bibliographical list descriptive of Romano-British Architectural Remains in Great Britain. Cambridge, 1912. Malcolm, James Peller (1767-1815). Lives of topographers and antiquaries who have written concerning the antiquities of England. 1815. Palestine Exploration Fund: Quarterly Statement, since 1869. Roman Britain in 1913, and 1914. Bibliography by Haverfield, F., in British Academy Supplemental Papers, ii 1914, pp. 34-58, and II, 1915, pp. 38-66. Roman Studies, Society for the promotion of: Journal, since 1911. Surrey Archaeological Collections. 26 vols., and extra vols. on Surrey Fines, and Waverley Abbey. 1858-1913. Sussex Archaeological Collections. 56 vols. 1853-1914. Upcott, William (1779-1845). A Bibliographical Account of the Principal Works relating to English Topography. 3 vols. 1818. Original Letters, Manuscripts, and State Papers (32,000 letters, illustrated with 3000 portraits). Privately ptd. 1836. For list of Antiquarian Societies see article by Tedder, H. R., in Encyclopaedia Britannica, edn 1911, vol. xxv, p. 318 a; and, for Bibliographies of the several Counties, see The Victoria County Histories (in progress). (ii) Particular P riters Akerman, John Yonge (1806-1873). Archaeological Index to Remains of Celtic, Romano-British and Anglo-Saxon Periods, 1848. Remains of Saxon Pagandom (from tumuli, etc.), 1852-5. Articles in Numismatic Journal. Allen, Thomas (1803-1833). History and Antiquities of Lambeth, 1824-7; of London, etc., 4 vols., 1827-9. History of the County of York, 6 vols., 1828-31; of Lincoln, 2 vols., Leeds, 1830; of Surrey, and Sussex, 2 vols., 1829-30. Anderson, Joseph. Scotland in Early Christian Times. Edinburgh, 1881-2. Scotland in Pagan Times. Ib. 1883-6. Early Christian Mionuments of Scotland. Ib. 1903; etc. Avebury, Lord, see Lubbock, Sir John. Baines, Edward (1774-1848). History of Yorkshire, 1822-3; of Lancashire, 4 vols., 1836. Baker, George. History and Antiquities of Northamptonshire. 5 parts. 1822-41. Bateman, Thomas (1821-1861) and Glover, Stephen (d. 1869). Vestiges of the Antiquities of Derbyshire. 1848. Bates, Cadwallader John. Border Holds of Northumberland, in Archaeologia Aeliana, vol. xv, pp. 1-465, 1891. [Unfinished.] History of Northumberland, 1895. Bayley, John [ Whitcomb] (d. 1869). History and Antiquities of the Tower of London. 2 vols. 1821-5. Beddoe, John (1826-1911), M.D., physician and anthropologist. Contributions to Scottish Ethnology, 1853. The Races of Britain, 1885. The Anthropological History of Europe, 1891. Memories of Eighty Years. 1910. Bentham, James (1708-1794). History of Ely Cathedral. 1771; 2nd edn, 1812. Supplement by Stevenson, William, 1814. Besant, Sir Walter (1836-1901). London, 1892. Westminster, 1895. South London, 1899. Survey of London (in the Time of the Tudors, and the Stuarts). 3 vols., 1902-4. [Unfinished.] Billings, Robert William (1813-1874). Architectural Illustrations and Description of the Cathedral Church of Durham, 1843. Architectural508

Bibliography

[CH.

Antiquities of the County of Durham, 1846. The baronial and ecclesiastical Antiquities of Scotland, 4 vols., 1845-52. Bond, Thomas (1765-1837). History and Description of Corfe Castle. 1884. Boutell, Charles (1812-1877). Monumental Brasses of England, 1849; Manual of British Archaeology, 1859. Brand, John. Observations on Popular Antiquities, including the whole of H. Bourne's Antiquitates Vulgares, with addenda to every chapter of that work. 1777. New edns, by Ellis, Sir Henry, 1813,1843,1849. - The History and Antiquities of Newcastle-upon-Tyne. 2 vols. 1789. - any papers in Archaeologia. Bray, William. See Manning, Owen. Brayley, Edward Wedlake. Views in Suffolk, Norfolk, and Northamptonshire, illustrative of the works of Robert Bloomfield. 1806. Lambeth Palace. 1806. The History of the Abbey Church of Westminster. 2 vols. 1818. - Topographical Sketches of Brighthelmnstone. 1825. - Historical and Descriptive Accounts of Theatres in London. 1826. Londiniana. 1829. History of Surrey. 5 vols. 1841-8. See, also, Britton, John. Britton, John, with Brayley, E. W. The Beauties of Wiltshire, vols. I, II, 1801, vol. II, 1825; The Beauties of England and Wales, 9 vols.; with continuation in 9 more vols. by others, 1801-15. History of the Palace and Houses of Parliament. 1834-6. Architectural Antiquities of Great Britain. 9 vols. 1805-14. Cathedral Antiquities of England, 6 vols., 1814-15; Historical Account of Redcliffe Church, Bristol, 1813; Illustrations of Fonthill Abbey, 1823; Architectural Antiquities of Normandy, with illustrations by Pugin, 1828; Picturesque Antiquities of English Cities, 1830. Autobiography. 1850. Descriptive Account of his Literary Works, by Jones, T. E. Brownlow, W. R. See Northcote, James Spencer. Bruce, John Collingwood. The Roman Wall, 1851; 3rd edn, 1867. Handbook to the Roman Wall, 1863; 6th edn, 1909. Lapidarium Septentrionale, 1875; etc. Chalmers, George. Treaties between Great Britain and other Powers, 2 vols., 1750-90; Annals of the Colonies, 1780; 2nd edn, Boston, 1845. Lives of Ruddiman, 1794, of Sir David Lyndsay, 3 vols., 1806, and of Mary, Queen of Scots, 3 vols., 1822. Caledonia: an account of... North Britain. 1807-24. Clark, George Thomas. Mediaeval Military Architecture in England. 2 vols. 1884. Clark, John Willis. Architectural History of the University and Colleges of Cambridge, by Willis, Robert, and C. 4 vols. Cambridge, 1886. Concise Guide to Cambridge. 1898. Barnwell Priory. 1897, 1907. The Care of Books. 1901. XWith Hughes, T. MIK.: Life and Letters of Professor Sedgwick. 2 vols. 1890. Life. By Shipley, A. E. 1914. Clarke, Hyde (b. 1815). Researches in Prehistoric and Protohistoric Comparative Philology, Mythology, and Archaeology, in connection with the Origin of Culture in America and the Accad or Sumerian Families, 1875. Serpent and Siva Worship and Mythology in Central America, Africa, and Asia. 1876.xv] Archaeological 4ntiquaries 509 Clutterbuck, Robert (1772-1831). History and Antiquities of Hertfordshire. 3 vols. 1815-27. Collinson, John (1757?-1793). Beauties of British Antiquity selected from the writings of esteemed Antiquaries, 1779. History and Antiquities of Somerset, 3 vols. Bath, 1791. Corstopitum. Reports of the Excavations in 1907-10. By Forster, R. H., Knowles, W. H., Craster, H. H. E., Haverfield, F., and others. Vols. Iv-vI. Newcastle-upon-Tyne, 1908-11. The Romano-British site of Corstopitum, Corbridge, Northumberland. An account of the excavations. London and Newcastle, 1910. Cumming, Joseph George (1812-1868). Antiquitates Manniae; antiquities of the Isle of Man, Douglas, 1857, 1868; Ruins and other monumental remains of the Isle of Man, 1857. Cunningham, Major-General Sir Alexander. An Essay on the Arian Order of Architecture, as exhibited in the Temples of Kashmir. Calcutta, 1848. The Bhilsa Topes, or Buddhist Monuments of Central India. 1854. Ladak, Statistical and Historical; with notices of the surrounding countries. 1854. The Ancient Geography of India; i, The Buddhist Period. 1871. Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum. Calcutta, 1879. The Stupa of Bharhut. 1879. Book of Indian eras. 1883. Curle, James. A Roman frontier post and its people: the fort of Newstead in the parish of Melrose. Glasgow, 1911. Cussans, John Edwin (1837-1899). History of Hertfordshire. 3 vols. 1870-3. De Ros, Lord. Memorials of the Tower of London. 1866. Duncumb, John (1765-1839). History of Herefordshire. 3 vols. 1804-12. Completed, 1866-82. Dunraven, third earl of, Wyndham-Quin, E. R. W. (1812-1871). Notes on Irish Architecture. Ed. Stokes, Margaret M. 2 vols. 1875-7. Earwaker, John Parsons (1847-1895). East Cheshire. 1877-81. The Recent Discoveries of Roman Remains in Chester. Mlanchester, 1889; etc. Elliot, Sir Walter (1803-1887). Hindu Inscriptions. 1837. - Coins of Southern India. 1885. Ellis, Sir Henry. Ed. Brand's Popular Antiquities. 1813,1843,1849. Introduction to Domesday Book. 1816. Original Letters illustrative of English History. First series, 1824; second series, 1827; third series, 1846. -- Two vols. on the Elgin and Phigaleian Marbles (1833); and two on the Townley Gallery (1836), in The Library of Entertaining Knowledge. Englefield, Sir Henry C. (1752-1822). Description of the Principal Beauties, Antiquities, etc., of the Isle of Wight. 2 vols., folio. 1816. Evans, Sir John. The Coins of the Ancient Britons, 1864; Suppl. 1890. The Ancient Stone Implements, Weapons, and Ornaments of Great Britain, 1872; 2nd edn, 1897. The Ancient Bronze Implements, Weapons, and Ornaments of Great Britain and Ireland, 1881. - Papers in Archaeologia, especially on Flint Implements in the Drift. 1860-2; etc. Eyton, Robert William (1815-1881). Antiquities of Shropshire. 12 vols. 1853-60. Domesday Studies, Somerset, 1880; Staffordshire, 1881. Fairholt, Frederick William (1814-1866). Costume in England. 1846. 3rd edn. 2 vols. 1860. Miscellaneous Remains of Londesborough. 1857. Rambles of an Archaeologist among Old Books and Old Places. 1871. Ed. Satirical songs and poems on Costume (Percy soc. Pub.) 1849. Fenton, Richard (1746-1821). Historical Tour through Pembrokeshire. 1811.510 Bibliography [CH. Fergusson, James. The Illustrated Hand-book of Architecture, 1855, 2nd edn, 1859. History of the Modern Styles of Architecture, 1862. Rock-cut Temples of India, 1864. Tree and Serpent Worship, 1868 and 1873. Rude Stone Monuments, 1872. The Cave-Temples of India, 1880; etc. Fordyce, William. History and Antiquities of the County of Durham. 2 vols. 1857. Fosbrooke, Thomas Dudley (1776-1842). British Monachism. 1802. 2nd edn, 1817. New edn, 2 vols. 1843. History of the County of Gloucester (from the papers of Bigland, Ralph). 2 vols. 1807. Encyclopaedia of Antiquities and Elements of Archaeology. 2 vols. 1822-3. New edn. 1843. The Arts, Manners, Manufactures, and Institutions of the Romans. 2 vols. 1833-5; etc. Fowler, William (1761-1832). Coloured Engravings of Roman Pavements, Stained Glass, etc. Atlas-folio. York, 1804. Franks, Sir Augustus Wollaston. Ed. with Latham, R. G., Kemble's Horae Ferales, 1863. Numerous memoirs on archaeological subjects, and catalogue of F.'s own collection of porcelain. Gough, Richard. A Catalogue of the Coins of Canute, King of Denmark. 1777. -- Anecdotes of British Topography. 1768; enlarged edn, 2 vols., 1780. - epulchral Monuments of Great Britain, applied to illustrate the history of families, manners, habits, and arts at the different periods from the Norman Conquest to the Seventeenth Century. 2 vols. 1786-99. English edition of Camden's Britannia. 1789. - History of Pleshy in Essex. 1803. An Account of the Coins of the Seleucidae, Kings of Syria. 1804. History of the Society of Antiquaries of London, prefixed to their Archaeologia. An Account of the Bedford Missal. [In MS.] Catalogue of Books relating to British Topography, etc., bequeathed by G. to the Bodleian. Oxford, 1814. Graves, James (1815-1886) [founder, with Prim, J. G., of the Kilkenny Archaeological Society, 1849]. St Canice Cathedral, Kilkenny. 1857. Greenwell, William (b. 1820). British Barrows, 1877. Durham Cathedral, 1881. Electrum Coinage of Cyzicus, 1887. Ed. Boldon Buke, 1852; Bishop Hatfield's Survey, 1857; Wills and Inventories from the Durham Registry, vol. II, 1859; Feodarium Prioratus Dunelmensis, 1872 (all Surtees society). Papers in Archaeologia, Journal of Royal Archaeological Institute, Numismatic Chronicle, Trans. of Durham and Northumberland Archaeological Society, etc. Grose, Francis. The Antiquities of England and Wales, 6 vols., 1773-87; Scotland, 2 vols., 1789-91; Ireland, 2 vols., 1791. A Treatise on Ancient Armour and Weapons, 1785-9. Military Antiquities, 2 vols., 1786-8, etc. Grub, George. See Robertson, Joseph. Guest, Edwin (1800-1880). Origines Celticae. Edd. Stubbs, W. and Deedes, C. 1883; etc. Hargrove, William (1788-1862). History of York, 3 vols., 1818. Hasted, Edward (1732-1812). History and Topographical Survey of Kent. 4 vols. Canterbury, 1778-99; 2nd edn, 12 vols., 1797-1801. Hatcher, Henry (1777-1846). Historical Account of Old and New Sarum. 1834. Contributor to Hoare's Modern Wiltshire, Britton's Beauties of Wiltshire, 1825, and Picturesque Antiquities, 1830. Hoare, Sir Richard Colt (1758-1838). Ed. Giraldus Cambrensis, Itinerarium Cambriae, 1804. The History of Ancient Wiltshire, 1810-21. The Modern History of South Wiltshire, 1822-43, etc.xv]

Archaeological Antiquaries

5 1

Horsfield, Thomas Walker (d. 1837), and Cooper, William Durrant (1812 -1875). History and Topography of Sussex. 1835. Hume, Abraham (1814-1884). The Antiquities of Cheshire. 1863. Learned societies and printing clubs of the United Kingdom, 1847; enlarged 1853. Hunter, Joseph. See sect. v (b), Literary Antiquaries, post. Hutchins, John (1698-1773). History and Antiquities of Dorset, 1774; ed. Gough, 1796-1815; edd. Shipp and Hodson, 1861-75. Hutchinson, William (1732-1814). View of Northumberland, 2 vols., 1776-8. History of Durham, 3 vols., 1785-94; and of Cumberland, 1794-98. Hutton, William (1723-1815). History of Birmingham, 1782; and of Derby, 1791. Included in collective edn of Works, 8 vols., 1817. Jefferson, Samuel (1809-1846). History and Antiquities of Carlisle (1838); and of Cumberland, 2 vols. Carlisle, 1840-2. Jeffrey, Alexander (1806-1874). History and Antiquities of Roxburghshire. Edinburgh, 1836. Rewritten, 4 vols., 1857-64. Jewitt, Llewellyn Frederick William (1816-1888). Hand-book of English Coins, 1864, 1881; English Coins and Tokens, 1886. Grave-Mounds and their Contents. 1870. Domesday-Book of Derbyshire. Folio. 1871. Half-hours among some English Antiquities. 1877, 1879. Kenrick, John. History of Ancient Egypt. 1850. History of Phoenicia. 1857. Roman Sepulchral Inscriptions. 1858. Selection of Papers on Archaeology and History. 1864. [Also many tutorial works.] Lee, John Edward (1808-1887). Isca Silurum, or An Illustrated Catalogue of the Museum of Antiquities at Caerleon. 1862. Leslie, F. The Early Races of Scotland, and other Monuments. 1866. Lipscomb, George (1773-1846). History of Buckinghamshire, 8 parts, in 4 vols., 1831-47; etc. Logan, James. The Scottish Gael, or Celtic Manners as preserved among the Highlanders, 1831. Clans of the Scottish Highlanders, 1843-9. Lubbock, (Sir) John, Lord Avebury. Prehistoric Times, 1865, 6th edn, 1900; The Origin of Civilisation and the Primitive Condition of Man, 1870, 6th edn, 1902; etc. Lysons, Daniel. Magna Britannia: an Account of the... Counties of Great Britain. 1806-22. [Begun in conjunction with his brother, Lysons, Samuel; deals with ten counties from Bedfordshire to Devonshire, in alphabetical order.] The Environs of London, 6 vols., 1792-1811; 2nd edn, 4 vols., 1811. Lysons, Samuel. Reliquiae Britannico-Romanae, containing Figures of Roman Antiquities discovered in England, 2 vols., 1801-17; included in later edn, 3 vols., 1813-17. See Lysons, Daniel. Me Caul, John. Britanno-Roman Inscriptions. 1863. Christian Epitaphs of the First Six Centuries. Toronto and London, 1869. Mackenzie, Sir James Dixon. The Castles of England, their Story and their Structure. 1897. Malcolm, James Peller (1767-1815). Londinium Redivivum. 4 vols. 1802-5. Lives of topographers and antiquaries who have written concerning the antiquities of England. 1815. Manning, Owen (1721-1801), and Bray, William (1736-1832). History and Antiquities of Surrey. 3 vols. 1804-14. Meyrick, Sir Samuel Rush (1783-1848). A critical inquiry into ancient armour. 3 vols. 1824; new edn, 1844. Mitchell, Arthur (1826-1909). The Past in the Present. (Rhind Lectures.) Edinburgh, 1880.512 Biliography [CH. Moore, Arthur William (1853-1909). History of the Isle of Man. 1900. Morgan, Thomas. Romano-British Pavements, a History of their Discovery and a Record and Interpretation of their Designs, with plates... of the most important Mosaics. 1886. Neilson, George (b. 1858). Trial by Combat. 1890. Per lineam Valli. 1891. Nicholas, Thomas (1820-1879). History and Antiquities of Glamorganshire. 1874. Nichols, John. Bibliographica Topographica Britannica, 10 vols. (with Gough, Richard, 1780-90). 1780-1800. The Progresses of Queen Elizabeth. 1788-1821. History and Antiquities of the Town and County of Leicester. 8 vols. 1795-1815. Index to the nine vols. of Bowyer's Literary Anecdotes of the Eighteenth Century. 1812-16. Illustrations of the Literary History of the Eighteenth Century, vols. I-Iv, 1817-28; followed by vols. v-vIIi, edited by his son, Nichols, John Bowyer, and his grandson, Nichols, John Gough, 1828-58. Norris, Edwin. Kapur-di-Giri rock-inscription, in the Transactions of the Royal Asiatic Society. 1845. The Ancient Cornish Drama, with a Sketch of Cornish Grammar. 2 vols. 1859. Assyrian Dictionary, Aleph to Nun. 3 vols. 1868-72. Northcote, James Spencer (1821-1907), and Brownlow, W. R. Roma Sotterranea. 1869. Oliver, J. R. Monumenta de Insula Manniae, 3 parts. (Manx society.) 1860-2. O'Neil, Henry (1817-1881). Ancient Crosses of Ireland, 1853; The most interesting of the Sculptured Crosses of Ancient Ireland, 1857; The Fine Arts and Civilization of Ancient Ireland, 1863. Ormerod, George (1785-1873). History of Cheshire. 3 vols. 1819. Ed. Helsby, T., 1882. Perry, L. T. and Henman, C. Illustrations of Medieval Antiquities in the County of Durham. Oxford, 1867. Petrie, George. Essay on Round Towers. 1833; enlarged in Trans. Royal Irish Acad. vol. xx; also, separately, as Ecclesiastical Architecture of Ireland, 1845. Essay on the Military Architecture of Ireland, MS in the library of the Royal Irish Academy. History and Antiquities of Tara Hill. Trans. Royal Irish Acad., vol. xviII, 1843. Stokes, William. Life and Labours in Art and Archaeology of George Petrie. 1868. Pitt-Rivers, Augustus Henry Lane Fox (1827-1900). Excavations at Cranborne Chase, 4 vols., 1887-1905. Various anthropological and archaeological addresses. Phelps, William (1776-1856). History of Somersetshire. 7 parts. 1835-9. Planche, James Robinson. History of British Costumes, 1834; new edn of Strutt's Regal and Ecclesiastical Antiquities of England. 1842. See, also, bibliography to vol. xiii, chap. viII, post. Prinsep, James. Benares illustrated. Calcutta, 1831; Essays on Indian Antiquities, collected by Thomas, Edward. 2 vols. 1858. Raine, James. History and Antiquities of North Durham. 2 vols. 1830-52. See, also, Surtees, Robert. Raine, John. History and Antiquities of Blyth [near Rotherham]. 1861. Rhind, Alexander Henry. The law of treasure-trove. 1858. Thebes, its Tombs and their Tenants. 1862; etc. Rich, Anthony (1804-1891). A Dictionary of Roman and Greek Antiquities. 1849. 3rd edn. 1873. Robertson, Eben William (1815-1874). Scotland and her Early Kings. 1862; Historical Essays. 1872.xv]

Archaeological Antiqzaries

5 3

Robertson, Joseph (1810-1866) and Grub, George (1812-1892). Topography and Antiquities of Aberdeen and Banff, 4 vols. Spalding club, 1843-69. Also four other volumes edited for the same club. Robertson, William Archibald Scott (1836-1897). Kentish Archaeology, parts I-VI. 1876-84. Rolleston, George (1829-1881). Forms of Animal Life, 1872; British Barrows, 1877'; Prehistoric Fauna, 1880. Scarth, Harry Mengden (1814-1890). Roman Bath, 1864; Picturesque Bath, 1881; Roman Britain, 1883. Scott, Sir Walter. Border Antiquities. 2 vols. 1814. See bibliography to chap. I, ante. Seebohm, Frederic. See bibliography to vol. xiv, chapter on Historians. Shaw, Stebbing (1762-1802). History and Antiquities of Staffordshire. 2 vols. 1798-1801. Silchester Excavations in 1890-1909. Reports in Archaeologia. Simpson, Sir James Young (1811-1870). Archaeological Essays. 1873. Smith, Alfred Charles (b. 1822). British and Roman Antiquities of the North Wiltshire Downs (Wilts. Arch. soc.). 1885. Smith, Charles Roach. Illustrations of Roman London, 1859. Collectanea, 1848, etc. Articles in Archaeologia, and Numismatic Chronicle. Smith, John Thomas (1766-1833). Antiquities of London. 1791-1800. Antiquities of the City of Westminster. 1807; 1837. Stanley, Arthur Penrhyn. See bibliography to chap. xiv, ante. Stephens, George (1813-1895). The Old Northern Runic Monuments of Scandinavia and England, now first collected and deciphered, 3 vols., 1866-84; abridged Handbook, 1884. Stuart, John. The Sculptured Stones of Scotland, 1856. The Book of Deer, 1869. A lost chapter in the History of Mary Queen of Scots, 1874. Stuart, Robert. Caledonia Romana: a treatise on the influence of the Romans in Scotland, 1845; revised by Thomson, David, 1852. Views and Notices of Glasgow in Former Times, 1848. Suckling, Alfred Inigo (1796-1856). Memorials of Essex, 1845. History and Antiquities of Suffolk. 2 vols. 1846-8. Surtees, Robert. History and Antiquities of the County Palatine of Durham. 4 vols. (Vol. Iv, ed. by Raine, James.) 1816-40. Taylor, James W. Historical Antiquities of Fife (chiefly ecclesiastical). 2 vols. Cupar-Fife, 1861-8; 2nd edn, Edinburgh, 1875. Thomas, Edward. Coins of the Patan Sultans of Hindustan, 1847, Dehli, 1851; The Chronicles of the Pathan Kings of Deh'li, illustrated by Coins, Inscriptions, and other Antiquarian Remains, 1871; Records of the Gupta Dynasty, illustrated by Inscriptions and Coins, 1876. Tod, James. Annals and Antiquities of Rajasthan (Western Rajputana), 2 vols., 1829-32. Travels in Western India, 1839. Vaux, William Sandys Wright (1818-1885). Nineveh and Persepolis, 1850. 4th edn, 1855. Handbook to the Antiquities in the British Museum. 1851. Persia, 1875; and Greek Cities and Islands of Asia Minor, 1877, in Ancient History from the Monuments. Wakeman, W. F. Handbook of Irish Antiquities. 1848. Archaeologia Hibernica. 1849. Walcott, Mackenzie Edward Charles. Traditions and Customs of Cathedrals. 1872. History of the Cathedrals, Conventual Foundations, Collegiate Churches, and Hospitals of Scotland. 1874. Warne, Charles (1802-1887). Dorsetshire: its Vestiges, Celtic, Eoman, Saxon, and Danish, 1865. The Celtic Tumuli of Dorset, 1866. Ancient Dorset:

E. L. XII.

33514 Bib/iography [CH. the Celtic, Roman, Saxon, and Danish Antiquities; including the Early Coinage, 1872. Warren, Sir Charles. See Wilson, Sir C. W. Watkin, William Thompson. Roman Lancashire. 1883. Roman Cheshire. 1886. Manuscript collections in the Chetham Library, Manchester. Westropp, Hodder M. (d. 1884). Handbook of Archaeology: Egyptian, Greek, Etruscan, Roman. 1867; 2nd edn, 1878. Prehistoric Phases; or Introductory Essays on Prehistoric Archaeology. 1872. Manual of Precious Stones and Antique Gems. 1874. Handbook of Pottery and Porcelain, 1880, etc. Westwood, John Obadiah (1805-1893). Palaeographia Sacra Pictoria. 1843-5. Facsimiles of Miniatures and Ornaments of Anglo-Saxon MSS. 1868. Lapidarium Walliae (Cambrian Arch. soc.). 1876-9. Whitaker, Thomas Dunham. An History of the Original Parish of Whalley and Honour of Clitheroe, in the Counties of Lancaster and York, Blackburn, 1801; 2nd edn, with additions, 1806. The History and Antiquities of the Deanery of Craven in the County of York, 1805; 2nd edn, enlarged, 1812. The Topography of...Leedes, and Parts Adjacent, by Ralph Thoresby (1715); 2nd edn, with Notes and Additions by Whitaker, T. D. Leeds, 1816. An Account of the Parish of Cartmell, Lancashire. 1818. An History of Richmondshire. 2 vols. 1823. White, Thomas Pilkington. Archaeological Sketches in Scotland; Kintyre and Knapdale. 2 vols. 1873-5. Wilde, Sir William Robert Willis. Catalogue of the Antiquities in the Museum of the Royal Irish Academy, Dublin, with 636 illustrations. 1857-62. Memoir of Gabriel Beranger, and of his Labours in the Cause of Irish Art and Antiquities (1760-80). Dublin, 1880; etc. Williams (Ab Ithel), John (1811-1862). Ecclesiastical Antiquities of the Cymry, or The Ancient British Church. 1844. Chronicle of the Princes, 1860, and Annales Cambriae, 1860, in Rolls series; Rules of Welsh Poetry, 1856, and Medical Practice of Rhinwallon and his Sons, 1856, in Welsh MSS Soc.; etc. Williams, George (1814-1878). The Holy City. 1845,1849. Willis, Robert (1800-1875). See Clark, John Willis, ante. Wilson, Sir Charles William (1836-1905). With Palmer, Henry Spencer: Ordnance Survey of the Peninsula of Sinai. 5 vols. 1869-71. With Warren, (Sir) Charles etc.: The Recovery of Jerusalem, etc., 1871. Picturesque Palestine, Sinai, and Egypt. 4 vols. 1880-5. From Korti to Khartoum, 1883; 4th edn, 1886. Handbooks for Asia Minor, 1892, and Constantinople, 1895. Wilson, Sir Daniel. The Archaeology and Prehistoric Annals of Scotland, 1851. Prehistoric Man. 2 vols., 1863; 2nd edn, 1865. Wilson, Horace Hayman. See Sanskrit Scholars, in sect. III, Oriental Scholars. Wood, J. T. (died c. 1888). Discoveries at Ephesus, including the Site and Remains of the Great Temple of Diana. 1877. Modern Discoveries on the Site of Ancient Ephesus. 1890. Worth, Richard Nicholls (1837-1896). History of County of Devon (Popular County Histories). 1886, 1889. Wright, Thomas. History of Essex. 1836. Queen Elizabeth and her Times. 2 vols. 1838. The Archaeological Album, or Museum of National Antiquities. 1845. Essays on Archaeological Subjects of the Middle Ages. 2 vols. 1846. The Celt, the Roman, and the Saxon. 1852, 1861, 1875,1885. History of Domestic Manners and Sentiments in England,xv] Archaeologica/ Antiz raries 515 during the Middle Ages. 1862; etc. History of Caricature and Grotesque in Literature and Art. 1865. Yates, James. Textrinum Antiquum, an account of the art of weaving among the Ancients. 1843. Numerous articles in Smith's Dictionary of Antiquities. V (b). LITERARY ANTIQUARIES Arber, Edward. Ed. English Reprints, 1868 ff.; An English Garner, 8 vols., 1877-96; The English Scholar's Library, 1895 ff.; Registers of the Company of Stationers of London, 1875-94; The first printed English New Testament; The first three English books on America, Birmingham, 1885; The Term Catalogues, 1904-6. Atkinson, Robert. Ed. Vie de Seint Auban, a Poem in Norman-French, ascribed to Matthew Paris. Dublin, 1876. The Book of Leinster (Royal Irish Academy), Dublin, 1880. The Book of Ballymote, a collection of pieces (Prose and Verse) in the Irish Language; now for the first time published, from the original MS in the library of the Royal Irish Academy, with introduction. Dublin, 1887. The Passions and Homilies from the Leabhar Breac. 1897. Joint editor of Irish Liber Hymnorum. 2 vols. 1898. Bain, Joseph, and Rogers, C. Ed. Liber Protocollorum M. C. Simonis Notarii Publici et Scribae Glasguensis, 1499-1513; also Rental Book of the Diary of Glasgow, 1509-1570 (Grampian club Pub.). Edinburgh, 1875. Bond, Sir Edward Augustus. Ed. four volumes of facsimiles of Anglo-Saxon Charters from 679 to the Conquest. Ed. Speeches in the Trial of Warren Hastings. 1859-61. Boswell, Sir Alexander. Reprinted, under title Frondes Caducae, Lodge's Fig for Momus; Churchyard's Myrrour of Man; The Book of the Chess; George Whetstone's Remembraunce of the Life of Sir Nicolas Bacon; the Colloquium inter Deum et Euam, etc. Auchinleck press, 1816-18. Botfield, Beriah. Catalogues of the Library of Durham Cathedral. Surtees society. 1840. Manners and Household Expenses of England in the Thirteenth and Fourteenth Centuries. Roxburghe club. 1841. John Row's History of the Kirk of Scotland. Maitland club. 1842. The Buke of Order of Knighthood. Abbotsford club. 1847. Notes on the Cathedral Libraries of England. 1849. Original Letters on Ecclesiastical Affairs of Scotland in 1603-25. Bannatyne club. 1851. Bibliotheca Hearniana (1848), reprinted in Reliquiae Hearnianae. 1869. Prefaces to the Editiones Principes of the Greek and Roman Classics, and of the Sacred Scriptures. 1861. Bruce, John. See bibliography to chapter on Historians, etc., vol. xiv, post. Christie, Richard Copley. See bibliography to chapter on Historians, etc., vol. xIV, post. Cooper, Charles Henry. Guide to Cambridge, 1831. Annals of Cambridge (695-1849), 4 vols., 1842-53, vol. v (1850-6), with index, 1908. Athenae Cantabrigienses, 1858-61. Memorials of Cambridge, 1858-66. Memoir of Margaret, Countess of Richmond, ed. Mayor, J. E. B., 1874. [Left much biographical material in manuscript.] Cooper, Charles Purton. An Account of the Public Records. 1832. Catalogue of the collection of old French Law, presented by C. to Lincoln's Inn. Coote, Henry Charles (1815-1885). Legal Treatises. A Neglected Fact in English History, 1804; The Romans of Britain, 1878. 33-2516 Bibliography [CH. Croker, Thomas Crofton. Researches in the South of Ireland, 1824. Fairy Legends and Traditions of the South of Ireland, 1825. Legends of the Lakes, 1828; new edn, 1853. Popular Songs of Ireland, 1839. Memoirs of Joseph Holt, General of the Irish Rebels in 1798. 2 vols. 1838. Dalyell, Sir John Graham. Scottish poems of the sixteenth century, 1801. Monastic antiquities, 1809. The darker superstitions of Scotland, 1834. Dowson, John (1810-1881). The Brotherhood of Purity, describing the Contention between Man and Beasts as to the Superiority of the Human Race, transl. from the Hindustani. 1869. HIindustani Grammar. 1872. A Classical Dictionary of Hindu Mythology and Religion, Geography, History, and Literature. 1879; 2nd edn, 1888. Ferguson, Sir Samuel (1810-1886). The Forging of the Anchor. Illustd edn, 1883. Also, other poems. Papers on Irish Antiquities in the Transactions of the Royal Irish Academy, 1876. Ogham Inscriptions in Ireland,Wales and Scotland. Ed. by Ferguson, Lady. 1887. Forshall, J. See Madden, Sir F. Gilbert, Sir John Thomas. See bibliography to chapter on Historians in vol. xiv, post. Graves, Charles, bishop of Limerick (1812-1899). Suggestions on editing and translating the old Irish laws. 1851. Papers on the interpretation of the Ogham inscriptions, bibliography in Proceedings of the Royal Irish Academy, series III, vol. vI, 1900, p. 334. Hardy, Sir Thomas Duffus. Ed. The Close Rolls, 2 vols., 1833-44; the Patent Rolls, 1835; the Rotuli de oblatis et finibus, 1835; the Rotuli Normanniae, 1835; the Charter Rolls, 1837; the Liberate Rolls, 1844; also Modus tenendi parliamentum, 1846. - Catalogue of Lords Chancellors, Keepers of the Great Seal, Masters of the Rolls and Officers of the Court of Chancery. 1843. - Preface to Henry Petrie's Monumenta Historica Britannica. 1848. - Descriptive Catalogue of Materials relating to the History of Great Britain and Ireland. 3 vols. 1862-71. - Ed. William of Malinesbury, De gestis regum Anglorum, 2 vols., 1840; continued John le Neve's Fasti Ecclesiae Anglicanae, 3 vols., Oxford 1854; English Syllabus of documents in Rymer's Foedera, 3 vols., 1869-85. Memoirs of Henry, Lord Langdale. 1783-1851. The Athanasian Creed in connection with the Utrecht Psalter. 1872. Further Report on the Utrecht Psalter. 1874. Haslewood, Joseph (1769-1833). Ed. Tusser's Five Hundred Points, 1810; The Mirror for Magistrates, 1815; etc. Account of Joseph Ritson, 1824. Hunter, Joseph. Hallamshire, 1819; enlarged, 1869. South Yorkshire, the history and topography of the Deanery of Doncaster. 1828-31. Ed. Cresacre More's Life of More, 1828; Thoresby's Diary, 1830. On Shakespeare's Tempest, 1839; Thomas Cartwright's Diary, 1843. Robin Hood. 1852. Many of his MSS are in the British Museum. Innes, Cosmo. Ed. Rescinded Acts, and Acts of the Scots Parliament, 1124 -1707; also many works for Bannatyne, Maitland, and Spalding clubs. Scotland in the Middle Ages, 1860. Sketches of Early Scotch History and Social Progress, 1861. Lectures on Scotch Legal Antiquities, 1872. Irish Texts society, The (founded 1898). Two dictionaries and 13 texts published, 1899-1913; others in preparation. James, Montague Rhodes. Catalogue of MSS at Peterhouse, 1899; Trinity, 1900-5; Emmanuel, 1905; Pembroke, Clare, Christ's, and Queens', 1905;xv]

Literary 4Anticuaries

517

Gonville and Caius, 1907-8; Trinity Hall, 1907; Magdalene, 1909; Corpus Christi, 1909-11; St John's, 1913. Cambridge, 1899-1913. Jamieson, John (1759-1838). Ed. Barbour's Bruce, 1820. Etymological dictionary of the Scottish language, 4 vols., 1808. Ed. by Longmuir and Donaldson. Paisley, 1879-87). Jamieson, Robert. Popular Ballads and Songs from Tradition, Manuscript, and Scarce Editions. 1806. With Weber, Henry, and Scott, Sir Walter: Illustrations of Northern Antiquities. 1814. Joyce, Patrick Weston. Origin and History of Irish Names of Places, 1869; 5th edn, 1883; 1913. Second series, Dublin, 1875. Old Celtic Romances (thirteen tales), translated from Gaelic. 1879. A Short History of Ireland, 1893;. A Social History of Ancient Ireland, 2 vols., 1903. Ancient Irish Music, 1882; Irish Music and Song, 1909; Irish Peasant Songs in the English language, 1909. Memoir in Proceedings of Royal Society of Antiquaries of Ireland. 16 Jan. 1915. Pp. 8-10. King, Richard John (1818-1879). Sketches and Studies, descriptive and historical (on the west of England), 1874. Kitchin, George William, Dean of Durham. Catalogue of MSS, Christ Church Library, 1867; History of France, 3 vols., 1873-7. Great Screen of Winchester Cathedral, 1887; Winchester, 1890. Record of the Northern Convocation (1907), and Records of Bishop Bury, 1910 (Surtees society). Laing, David. Ed. Dunbar's Works, 2 vols., 1834; Robert Baillie's Letters and Journals, 3 vols., 1841-2; John Knox's Works, 6 vols., 1846-64; Poems and Fables of Robert Henryson, 1865; Andrew of Wyntoun's Orygynale Cronykil of Scotland, 3 vols., 1872-9; and Sir David Lyndsay's Poetical Works, 1879. Select Remains of the Ancient Popular Poetry of Scotland, 1822; Fugitive Scottish Poetry, 1823-5; Early Metrical Tales, 1826. More than 100 papers in Proceedings of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland. Memoir prefixed to John Small's edn of Select Remains of Ancient Popular and Romance Poetry of Scotland. Edinburgh, 1885. Stevenson, T. G., Notices of David Laing with List of his Publications, etc., privately printed, 1878; Murray, David, David Laing, Antiquary and Bibliographer, in Scottish Historical Review, July 1914; separately printed, 1915. Lawrie, Sir Archibald Campbell (1837-1914). Index to the Acts of the Parliaments of Scotland (anon.). Edinburgh, 1875. Early Scottish Charters prior to 1153. Glasgow, 1905. Annals of Malcolm and William. Ib. 1910. Macpherson, David (1746-1816). Ed. Wyntoun's Orygynale Cronykil of Scotland, 1795; also, Rotuli Scotiae, vol. I, and part of vol. In, 1814. Madden, Sir Frederic. Ed. Havelok the Dane (Roxburghe club), 1828; Privy-Purse Expenses of the Princess Mary, afterwards Queen Mary, etc., 1831. - Illuminated Ornaments, selected from MSS, and Early Printed Books from the sixth to the seventeenth centuries. 1833. - [Letters on] Alcuine's Bible in the British Museum. 1836. - Ed. Sir Gawayne (Bannatyne club), 1839; and Layamon's Brut, or Chronicle of Britain (Soc. of Antiquaries), 3 vols., 1847; Silvestre's Universal Paleography, 2 vols., 1850. With Forshall, J.: Wicliff's Bible, 4 vols., 1850; Matthaei Parisiensis Historia Minor, 3 vols., 1866-9. Maidment, James. Nugae Derelictae, ed. J. M[aidment] et R. P[itcairn], tracts on the history and antiquities of Scotland. Edinburgh, 1822. Ed. works for the Bannatyne, Maitland, Abbotsford, and Hunterian clubs,518

Bibliography

[CH.

and for the Spottiswoode society. Scottish Ballads and Songs, 1859,1868. With Logan, W. H.: Dramatists of the Restoration, 14 vols., 1872-9. Nutt, Alfred Triibner (1856-1910). Studies in the legend of the Holy Grail, 1888. [Founded The Folk-Lore Journal, 1879, and joined in founding the Irish Texts society, 1898.] O'Curry, Eugene. Ed. two medieval Irish tales for the Celtic society, 1855. Lectures on the Manuscript Materials of Ancient Irish History, Dublin, 1861. On the Manners and Customs of the Ancient Irish, ed., with an introduction, appendices, etc. by Sullivan, W. P., 3 vols., Dublin, 1873. O'Donovan, John. Grammar of the Irish Language. 1845. Ed. Leabhar na g-Ceart, The Book of Rights. Dublin, 1847. Ed. The Annals of the Four Masters. 7 vols. Dublin, 1848-51. Petrie, Henry. Monumenta Historica Britannica, 1848. Pinkerton, John (1785-1826). Select Scottish ballads, 1783. Essay on medals, 1784. Ancient Scottish poems, 1797. History of Scotland, 2 vols., 1797. Pughe, William Owen (1759-1835). Welsh-English Dictionary, 1783-1803; abridged, 1806; new edn 1832 and 1857. lyvyrian archaeology of Wales, 1801-3; 1870. Welsh version of Paradise Lost. 1819. Reeves, William, Bishop of Down and Connor and Dromore. Ecclesiastical Antiquities of Down and Connor, 1847. Account of St Patrick's Bell, 1850. Acts of archbishop Colton, 1850. The Life of St Columba by Adamnan (Irish Arch. and Celtic soc.). Dublin, 1857. Robertson, Joseph. Ed. Statuta Ecclesiae Scoticanae for the Bannatyne club, 1866, and many other works. Sayle, Charles Edward. The Early English Printed Books in the University Library (1475-1640). 4 vols. Cambridge, 1900-7. Scott, Hew. Fasti Ecclesiae Scoticanae: the succession of Ministers in the Parish Churches of Scotland, from...1560 to the present time, 3 vols., 1866-71; new edn, 1915. Sharpe, Charles Kirkpatrick (1781?-1851). Ed. James Kirkton's Secret and True History of the Church of Scotland (1660-1678), Edinburgh, 1817. Ed. Robert Law's Memorialls (1638-84). Edinburgh, 1818. Fragments and Memoir. Edinburgh, 1869. Skene, William Forbes (1809-1892). The Highlanders of Scotland; their Origin, History and Antiquities. 2 vols. 1836-7. The Four Ancient Books of Wales. 1868. Celtic Scotland. 3 vols. Edinburgh, 1876-80. Smith, John (1747-1807). Gaelic Antiquities, 1780. Life of St Columba, 1798. Smith, Lucy Toulmin (1838-1911). Ed. The York Plays. 1885. The Expedition of Henry earl of Derby to Russia and the Holy Land. Camden soc., 1894. Ed. Leland's Itinerary in Wales, 1906; in England, 4 vols., 1907-10. Stokes, Margaret Mc Nair (1832-1900). Christian Inscriptions in the Irish Language, chiefly collected and drawn by George Petrie (Kilkenny Archaeological society's Publ.). 2 vols. Dublin, 1872-8. Early Christian Architecture in Ireland. 1878. Ed. A. N. Didron's Christian Iconography. 2 vols. 1886. Early Christian Art in Ireland. 1887. Six Months in the Apennines; a Pilgrimage in search of vestiges of the Irish Saints in Italy. 1892. Three Months in the Forests of France; a Pilgrimage in search of vestiges of the Irish Saints in France. 1895. The High Crosses of Ireland. 1898. Stokes, Whitley. Works on Indian law. 1863-91. Contributions to Irische Texte, 1884-1909, and Urkeltischer Sprachschatz, 1894. With Strachan, John: Thesaurus Palaeohibernicus. 2 vols. Cambridge, 1901-3.-__ _'

A -.



xvJ Lz terary intziq arzes 519 Strachan, John. See Stokes, Whitley. Strutt, Joseph (1749-1802). Chronicle of England. 1777-8. Biographical Dictionary of Engravers. 1785-6. Dresses and Habits of the English People. 1796-9. Sports and Pastimes of the People of England. 1801. Terry, C. S. A catalogue of the publications of Scottish historical and kindred clubs and societies. Glasgow, 1909. Thomrs, William John. Early Prose Romances, 3 vols., 1827-8; 2nd edn, 1858. Lays and Legends. 2 vols. 1834. Ed. The Book of the Court, 1838, etc.; Anecdotes and Traditions illustrative of Early English History and Literature, 1838-9 (Camden society); Reynard the Fox, 1844; Gainmer Gurton's Famous Histories, 1846; Pleasant Stories, 1846; Stow's Survey of London (1598), 1875. Thomson, Thomas. Ed. The Scots Acts, 1844, and other publications of the Record Commission. Todd, James Henthorn. St Patrick, Apostle of Ireland, 1864, and other works. Ward, Harry Leigh Douglas (1825-1906). Catalogue of [medieval] Romances in the British Museum, 3 vols., 1883-1910. Way, Albert (1805-1874). Promptorium Parvulorum sive Clericorum; Lexicon Anglo-Latinum Princeps, A.D.c. 1440. Camden soc. 3 vols. 1843, 1853, 1865. Weber, Henry. See Jamieson, Robert. Windele, John (1801-1865). 130 vols of MSS in library of the Royal Irish Academy. VI. BIBLIOGRAPHERS For the literature of antiquaries and bibliographers, much use has been made of the following work: Allibone, S. Austin. A critical Dictionary of English Literature and British and American Authors, in 3 vols., Lippincott, Philadelphia, vol. I, 1859; II, 1870; III, 1871; with Supplement in two vols. by Kirk, John Foster, 1891. (a) General Aldis, H. G. A list of books printed in Scotland before 1700. Edinburgh Bibliographical Society, 1904. Bibliographical Society (London). Transactions and Monographs, 1893 ff. Boyne, William. The Yorkshire Library (privately printed). 1869., Campbell, F. B. F The Battle of Bibliography. 1893. The Bibliography of the Future. 1895. Davidson, James (d. 1866). Bibliotheca Devoniensis, Exeter, 1852; Supplement, 1862. Ferguson, John. Some aspects of Bibliography. Edinburgh, 1900. The Witchcraft Literature of Scotland. Ib. 1897. Bibliotheca Chemica (catalogue of alchemical etc. books in the collection of Young, James). 2 vols. lb. 1906. Fishwick, Henry (1835-1914). Lancashire Library, 1875; Bibliography of Rochdale, Manchester, 1880. Fletcher, William Younger. English Book-Collectors. 1902. Gentleman's Magazine Library, The. Bibliographical notes, 1889; literary curiosities, 1888. Gilbert, H. M. Bibliotheca Hantoniensis. Southampton, 1872. Harrison, William (1802-1884). Bibliotheca Monensis. Douglas, 1871. London Library, Subject Index, 1909; Authors' Catalogue, 2 vols., new edn, 1914.520

Bibliography

[cH.

Mayo, Charles Herbert. Bibliotheca Dorsetiensis (Chiswick press), 1885. Murray, David. An Archaeological Survey of the United Kingdom. The Preservation and Protection of our Ancient Monuments. 1896. Museums, Their History and their Use. 1904. Bibliography of George Buchanan, in Glasgow Quatercentenary Studies, pp. 393-523. 1907. Robert and Andrew Foulis, and the Glasgow Press. Glasgow, 1913. David Laing, Antiquary and Bibliographer. lb. 1915. Bibliography: its Scope and Methods. Ib. 1915. Rye, Walter. Index to Norfolk Topography. Index soc. 1883. Index to Norfolk pedigrees, and Supplementary Index of Norfolk topography. 1896. United States Catalog; Books in Print, Jan. 1, 1912. Minneapolis and New York, 1912. Walcott, M. E. C. Introduction to Sources of Salopian Topography. Shrewsbury, 1879. See, also, sect. v (a), (ii), ante. (b) Special Ames, Joseph. Typographical Antiquities, 1749; ed. Herbert, W., 3 vols., 1785-90; ed. Dibdin, T. E., vols. I-Iv, 1810-19 (not completed). Beloe, William. Anecdotes of Literature and Scarce Books. 1806-12. The Sexagenarian, 1817; 2nd edn, 1818. Blades, William (1824-1890). Life and Typography of William Caxton, compiled from original sources, 2 vols., 1861-3; 2nd edn, 1883. The Enemies of Books, 1880; 3rd edn, 1881; enlarged, 1888. Bibliographical Miscellanies, 1-5, 1890. Bohn, Henry George. The Guinea Catalogue of Old Books. 1841. Bradshaw, Henry. Collected Papers. 1889. Life, by Prothero, G. W. 1888. [The Henry Bradshaw society, for editing rare liturgical tracts, was founded in his memory, 1890.] Bridgman, Richard Whalley (1761?-1820). Thesaurus Juridicus, 1799-1800. 2 vols. 1806. Brydges, Sir Samuel Egerton. Censura Literaria, 10 vols., 1805-9 and 1815; British Bibliographer, 4 vols., 1810-14; Restituta: or Titles, Extracts, and Characters of old books in English Literature Revived. 1814-16. [Many Elizabethan texts were privately printed by him at Lee Priory, near Canterbury.] Burton, John Hill. See bibliography to chap. on Historians, etc. in vol. xiv. Chandler, Henry William (1828-1889). Catalogue of his collection of editions of Aristotle's Nicomachean Ethics, presented to Pembroke College, Oxford, 1868; chronological index, 1878; with portrait, 1891. Christie, R. C. See bibliography to chap. on Historians, etc. in vol. xiv. Clarke, Adam (1762?-1832). Bibliographical Dictionary, 8 vols., 1802-6. - Miscellaneous works, 13 vols., 1836. Life, by his son. 1833. Collier, John Payne. Ed. papers for the Camden society, 1838-63; the Percy society, 1840-4; and the Shakespeare society, 1841-51. Ed. Roxburghe Ballads, 1847; Registers of the Stationers' company, 1848-9; etc. Notes on rare English books, 1865. See, also, bibliography to vol. v, chaps. vII-xII, ante. Copinger, Walter Arthur. Supplement to Hain's Repertorium Bibliographicum, 1895-8 (adds c. 7000 new entries to Hain's 16,000). Incunabula Biblica. 1892. History of the Copingers, 1882; History of Suffolk, 5 vols., 1904-7; Manors of Suffolk, 7 vols., 1905-11. Cotton, Henry (1789-1879). Bibliography of the English Bible, 1821; Bibliography of English Roman Catholic versions, 1855. Typographicalxv] Bibliographers 521 Gazetteer, 1829. Fasti Ecclesiae Hibernicae, 1845-78, and other works. Courtney, William Prideaux. Register of National Bibliography. 3 vols. 1905-12. With Boase, G. C.: Bibliotheca Cornubiensis. 3 vols. 1874-82. Bibliography of Johnson. (Oxford Historical and Literary Studies. Vol. iv.) Rev. by Smith, D. N., Oxford, 1915. Crawford, James Ludovic Lindsay, earl of (1847-1914). Bibliotheca Lindesiana: (a) Hand-List to the early editions of the Greek and Latin writers of ancient and mediaeval times, 1885; (b) 18 other bibliographies. Aberdeen, etc., 1883-1913. Darling, James (1797-1862). Cyclopaedia Bibliographica. 2 vols. 1854, 1859. De Morgan, Augustus (1806-1871). Formal Logic, 1846. Essay on Probabilities. 1838. List of Arithmetical Books. 1847. A Budget of Paradoxes. 1872. Dibdin, Thomas Frognall. An Introduction to the Knowledge of Rare and Valuable editions of the Greek and Latin Classics, 1802, 1804, 1809, 1827. Bibliomania, 1809; enlarged, 1811; best edn, 1842. Ed. Ames, Typographical Antiquities, 1810-19. The Bibliographical Decameron, 3 vols., 1817. A Bibliographical, Antiquarian, and Picturesque Tour in France and Germany, 3 vols., 1821 (inferior 2nd edn, 1829); in the Northern Counties of England, 2 vols., 1838. The Library Companion, or the Young Aan's Guide and the Old Man's Comfort in the choice of a Library, 1829. Dickson, Robert, and Edmond, John Philip (keeper of the Signet library, Edinburgh, and author of Catalogue of its Incunabula). Annals of Scotch Printing. Cambridge, 1890. Dickson, William Purdie. New Catalogue and Subject Catalogue of Glasgow University Library. The Glasgow University Library, Notes on its History, Arrangements and Aims. Glasgow, 1888. D'Israeli, Isaac. Curiosities of Literature, 1791-3; 2nd edn, 1794; second series, 3 vols., 1823. Calamities of Authors, 1812-13. Quarrels of Authors 1814. Commentaries on the Life and Reign of Charles I., 1828-30. The Genius of Judaism, 1833. Amenities of Literature, 1840. Edmond, John Philip. See Dickson, Robert. Edwards, Edward. Catalogue of the Great Rebellion Tracts in the British Museum. Memoirs of Libraries, including a Handbook of Library Concerns, 1859. Lives of the Founders of the British Museum, 1870. Elton, Charles Isaac (1839-1900). Numerous writings on historical, archaeological, legal, and literary topics. With Elton, Mary Augusta: The great book collectors. 1893. Engel, Carl (1818-1882). Literature of National Music. 1879. Finlayson, James (1840-1906). Life of Robert Watt, 1897. Bibliographies of Peter Lowe and Sylvester Rattray; Bibliographical demonstrations on the works of Hippocrates, Celsus, Galen. Glasgow, 1892-5. Fortescue, George Knottesford (1847-1912). Subject Index of Modern Works in the British Museum, 1881-1900,1901-1905,1906-1910,5 vols., 1902-1911. Biographical notice in The Library, January 1913. Fry, Francis (1803-1886). Facsimile of Tyndale's New Testament (of 1525 or 1526). 1862. Description of the Great Bible of 1539 (Cranmer's Bible) and editions in large folio of the Authorised Version. 1865. Account of Coverdale's Bible (1535). 1867. Bibliographical description of Tyndale's version (1534). 1878. Garnett, Richard (1835-1906). Relics of Shelley. 1862. A description of 300 Notable Books. Privately ptd. 1899. Essays in Librarianship and Bibliography. 1899; etc.522 Bibliography [CH. Greswell, William Parr (1765-1854). Annals of Parisian Typography, 1818; View of the Early Parisian Greek Press, 1833, 1840. Ed. vol. in of the Chetham Catalogue, Manchester. Halkett, Samuel, and Laing, John. Dictionary of Anonymous and Pseudonymous Literature of Great Britain. 1882-8. Halliwell (afterwards Halliwell-Phillipps), James Orchard. Ed. works for Camden society, 1839-44; Percy society, 1842-50; and Shakespeare society. Catalogue of MSS of Chetham library. Manchester, 1841-2. Dictionary of Archaic and Provincial Words. 1846. As to his Shakespearean works, see bibliography to vol. v, ehs. vII-xII. Hartshorne, Charles Hay. The Book Rarities in the University of Cambridge. 1829. Harwood, Edward (1729-1794). A view of the various editions of the Greek and Roman Classics, 1775, 1778, 1782; best edn, 1790. Biographia Classica: The Lives and Characters of the Greek and Roman Classics, 2nd edn, 1778. Hazlitt, William Carew (1834-1913). Catalogue of early English music in the Harleian Library, British Museum. 1862. Handbook to the Popular Poetical and Dramatic Literature of Great Britain from the Invention of Printing to the Restoration. 1867. Bibliographical Collections and Notes. 8 vols. 1876-1904. Heber, Richard. Bibliotheca Heberiana. 4 vols. 1834-7. Herbert, William (1718-1795). Enlarged edition of Ames's Typographical Antiquities. 3 vols. 1785-90. Hoblyn, Robert, of Nanswhyden, Cornwall (1710-1756). Bibliotheca Hoblyniana. 1769. Horne, Thomas Hartwell (1780-1862). An Introduction to the Study of Bibliography, 2 vols., 1814. A Catalogue of the Harleian MSS in the British Museum, classed according to their subject-matter, 1812. Outlines for the Classification of a Library, respectfully submitted to the consideration of the Trustees of the British Museum, 1825. A Catalogue of the Library of Queens' College, Cambridge, methodically arranged, 2 vols., 1827. Introduction to the Critical Study and Knowledge of the Holy Scriptures, 1818; Suppl., 1821; frequently reissued and enlarged; vol. v of 7th edn published separately as A Manual of Biblical Bibliography, 1839. Irving, David. Lives of the Scotish Poets. 1804; 2nd edn, improved, 1810. Lives of the Scotish writers. 1839; 2nd edn, 1850. Life of George Buchanan. 1805; 1817. Ed. Selden's Table-Talk, 1819; Dempster (for Bannatyne club), 1829. History of Scotish Poetry. Ed. by Carlyle, John. 1861. A Catalogue of Law Books in the Advocates' Library. Edinburgh, 1831. Laing, John. See Halkett, Samuel. Lang, Andrew. See bibliography in vol. xIII, post. Law, Thomas Graves. See bibliography to chap. on Historians in vol. xiv. Lee, William. Life of Defoe; and Bibliography of his writings. 1869. Lowe, Robert W. A Bibliographical Account of English Theatrical Literature, from the earliest times to the present day. 1887. Lowndes, William Thomas. The Bibliographers Manual, 1834. The British Librarian, 1839-42. MacCulloch, John Ramsay (1789-1864). Essay on Wages, 1826; Dictionary of Commerce, 1832; Literature of Political Economy, 1845. Catalogue of his Library, 1862. Maitland, Samuel Roffey. See bibliography to chap. on Historians, etc. in vol. xiv.xv] Bibliographers 523 Mayor, John Eyton Bickersteth. Bibliographical Clue to Latin Literature (founded on Hiibner). 1875. See, also, sect. I, ante. Mayor, Joseph Bickersteth (b. 1828). Guide to Classical Books. 1874,1879. Supplement, 1896. Moss, Joseph William (1803-1862). Manual of Classical Bibliography. 1825. Orme, William (1787-1830). Bibliotheca Biblica. Edinburgh, 1824. Biographies of Nonconformists (John Owen, 1820; William Kiffin, 1823; John Urquhart, 1827; Richard Baxter, 1830). Parr, Samuel. See sect. I, ante. Bibliotheca Parriana, edited by Bohn, H. G. (Catalogue of his library at Hatton in Warwickshire), 1827 (cf. The Gentleman's Magazine, 1827, vol. II, p. 195; The Monthly Review, cxIv, p. 303; The Literary Gazette, 1827, p. 516). Paterson, Samuel (1728-1802). Bibliotheca Westiana, 1772; Beauclerkiana, 1781; Universalis Selecta, 1786; Strangeiana, 1801. Pettigrew, Thomas Joseph (1791-1865). Bibliotheca Sussexiana. 2 vols. 1827-39. Power, John. A handy book about Books, for Book-Lovers. 1871. Proctor, Robert George Collier. Catalogue of 3000 incunabula in the Bodleian Library. 1891-3. Index to the Early Printed Books in the British Museum: from the invention of printing to the year MD., with notes of those in the Bodleian Library. 1898. The Printing of Greek in the Fifteenth Century (Bibliographical society). 1900. Bibliographical Essays, collected in 1905. Quaritch, Bernard. General Catalogue of Old Books and Manuscripts, 1887-8, index, 1892, 7 vols. Reid, John (1808-1841?). Bibliotheca Scoto-Celtica. 1832. Ritson, Joseph. Select Collection of English Songs, 1783; Bibliographia Poetica, 1802; etc. Rylands, John, Library; bibliographical description of Greek and Latin classics, etc. 1906. Catalogue of printed books and MSS. 3 vols. 1899. Catalogue of books printed to the end of 1640. 1895. Sinker, Robert. Catalogue of 15th Century printed books in Trinity college library. 1876. Catalogue of English Books printed before 1601 in Trinity college library. 1885. The Library of Trinity college, Cambridge. 1891. Smith, John Russell (1810-1894). Bibliotheca Cantiana. 1837. A bibliographical list of all the Works which have been published towards illustrating the Provincial Dialects of England. 1839. A bibliographical Catalogue of English writers on Angling and Ichthyology. 1850. Bibliotheca Americana. 1865-7. Smith, Joseph. Quaker literature. 2 vols. 1867. Swainson, William (1789-1855). Bibliography of Zoology, in part 2 of his Taxidermy. 1830. Zoological Illustrations. 1820-3; etc. Waring, Edward John. Bibliotheca Therapeutica. 2 vols. 1878-9. Watt, Robert. Catalogue of Medical Books. 1812. Bibliotheca Britannica, a general Index to British and Foreign Literature, in two parts, Authors and Subjects; posthumously published in 4 vols.; vols. I and ii containing alphabetical list of authors and their works, and vols. II and iv an alphabetical classification of subjects. Edinburgh, 1819-24. Weale, John (1791-1862). Catalogue of books on Architecture and Engineering. 1854. Weale, W. H. J. Bibliographia Liturgica. 1886.524 Supplementary Bibliography SUPPLEMENTARY BIBLIOGRAPHY RELATIONS OF ENGLISH AND CONTINENTAL LITERATURES IN THE ROMANTIC PERIOD GENERAL WORKS Beers, H. A. A History of English Romanticism in the Nineteenth Century. 1902. Betz, L. P. La litterature comparee. Essai bibliographique. 2nd edn, by Baldensperger, F. Strassburg, 1904. Brandes, G. Naturalismen i England. Hovedstromninger i det 19. Aarhundredes Literatur, iv. Copenhagen, 1875. (Samlede Vserker, vol. v, pp. 269 if.) Eng. transl., 6 vols., 1901-5. Courthope, W. J. A History of English Poetry. Vol. vi. 1910. Elton, 0. A Survey of English Literature, 1780-1830. 1912. Especially vol. I, pp. 23 f.; II, pp. 405 ff. and notes. Herford, C. H. The Age of Wordsworth. 1897. Omond, T. S. The Romantic Triumph. (Periods of European Literature, xi.) Edinburgh, 1900. Richardson, G. F. A Neglected Aspect of the English Romantic Revolt. Berkeley. University of California Press, 1915. Richter, H. Geschichte der englischen Romantik. i, ii, 1. Halle, 1911 ff. Saintsbury, G. History of Criticism. Vol. III. Edinburgh, 1904. Stephen, Leslie. The Importation of German (Studies of a Biographer, vol. II). 1898. Vaughan, C. E. The Romantic Revolt. (Periods of European Literature, xi.) Edinburgh, 1900. For the influence of Shakespeare on continental literature in the romantic period, see bibliography to vol. v, chaps. vIII-xII, pp. 467 ff. FRANCE [Angell, J. B.] Influence of English Literature upon the French. North American Review. Vol. LXXXVI, pp. 412 ff. 1858. Beljame, A. Le public et les hommes de lettres en Angleterre au 18e siecle. Paris, 1881. Blanqui, A. Voyage d'un jeune Franais en Angleterre et en Pcosse pendant l'automne. Paris, 1823. (Cf. Sainte-Beuve, in Le Globe, vol. I, p. 291, 1825.) Chasles, Ph. Etudes sur la litt6rature et les mceurs de l'Angleterre au xIxe siecle. Paris, 1851. Chateaubriand, F. R. vicomte de. Essai sur la litterature anglaise, fragment, en tete de Souvenirs d'Italie, d'Angleterre et d'Amerique. 1815. Cf. North American Review, Oct. 1839; Prescott, W. H., Chateaubriand's English Literature, in Biographical and Critical Miscellanies, pp. 215 ff., 1845. Hamerton, P. G. French and English. Atlantic Monthly. Vols. LVIII, LIX. 1886. Rptd separately, 1889.Supplementary Bibliograp/y

525

La France et la Grande-Bretagne: des rapports litt6raires, etc. Revue Europ6enne. Aug. 1824. Lami, E. Voyage en Angleterre. Paris, 1829-30. Parigot, H. Le drame d'Alexandre Dumas. Chap. II. Paris, 1899. Pichot, A. Voyage historique et litt6raire en Angleterre et en l]cosse. 3 vols. Paris, 1825. Cf. Sainte-Beuve, Le Globe, vol. II, pp. 921, 950, 1027. 1825. Potez, H. Le romantisme frangais et l'influence anglaise. La Quinzaine. 1 and 16 Oct. 1899. Rathery, J. B. Des relations sociales et intellectuelles entre la France et l'Angleterre. Revue Contemporaine, 1855. Paris, 1860. Renard, G. L'influence de l'Angleterre sur la France depuis 1830. Nouvelle Revue. Vol. xxxv, pp. 675 ff. 1885. Rosieres, R. La litterature anglaise en France de 1750 a 1800. Revue Bleue. 19 Aug. 1882. Russell, J. Essai sur les mceurs de la litterature des Anglais et des Francois. Trad. de l'Anglais. Paris, 1822. Sarolea, C. Influence de la culture frangaise sur la culture anglaise. Revue franaise d'tdimbourg. Vol. i. 1897. - Le commerce des idees entre la France et l'Angleterre. Revue de Belgique. Oct. 1896; also 1897. Simond, L. Voyage d'un Francois en Angleterre. Paris, 1816. 2nd edn. 1817. Souriau, M. Introduction a la Preface de Cromwell. Paris, 1897. Texte, J. Les relations litt6raires de la France avec l'etranger de 1799 a 1848. In Petit de Julleville, L., Histoire de la langue et de la litterature francaise des origines 'a 1900. Vol. vii, pp. 701 if. Paris, 1899. -- J. J. Rousseau et les origines du cosmopolitisme litteraire. Etude sur les relations litt6raires de la France et de l'Angleterre au xvIIIe siecle. Paris, 1895. Eng. transl. 1899. Turquet-Milnes, G. The Influence of Baudelaire in France and England. 1913. For translation of English writers into French, see, especially, Lanson, G., Manuel bibliographique de la litterature francaise moderne, 1500-1900, vol. iv, pp. 949 ff., 1119 ff., 1147 ff., Paris, 1912. ITALY Italian Influence on English Poetry. Edinburgh Review. Jan. 1896. Koeppel, E. Italienische Einfiiusse auf die englische Literatur. Jahresberichte. 1890, 1895-6. Kuhns, O. Dante's influence on English Poetry in the 19th century. Mod. Lang. Notes. Vol. xiv. 1899. Marchesi, G. Leopardi e la poesia inglese. Iride. Vol. III. 1899. Massarani, T. Poeti inglesi nelle versioni italiane. In Studi di letteratura e d' arte. Florence, 1899. Rosi, M. Contribuzioni alla storia dei rapporti fra GLenova e l' Inghilterra. Rend. d. R. Accad. d. Lincei. Vol. viI. Schanzer, A. 11 Leopardi in Inghilterra. Rass. nationale. April 1900. Scudder, V. D. The Life of the Spirit in the modern English Poets. (Influence of Dante.) Boston, 1895. Segre, C. Relazioni letterarie fra Italia e Inghilterra. Studi. Florence, 1911. Toynbee, P. Dante in English Literature. 2 vols. 1909. Valgimigli, A. I1 culto di Dante in Inghilterra. Giornale Dant. Vol. vI. 1898. Viglione, F. Ugo Foscolo in Inghilterra. Catania, 1910.526

Supplementary Bibliography

SPAIN Ford, J. D. M. English Influence upon Spanish Literature in the early part of the 19th century. Publ. of the Mod. Language Association of America. Vol. xvI. 1901. GERMANY For more detailed bibliographies of German writers in their relations to England, see Goedeke, K., Grundriss zur Geschichte der deutschen Dichtung, vols. iv ff. See, also, bibliographies of Byron, Carlyle, Scott, etc. Alford, R. G. Goethe's earliest critics in England. Publications of the English Goethe Society. Vol. vII. 1893. [Angell, J. B.] Influence of the English Literature on the German. North American Review. Vol. LXXXIV, pp. 311 ff. April 1857. Anti-Jacobin Review and Magazine, The. [Ed. by Gifford, W.] 1799 -1812. Bahlsen, L. Kotzebues Peru-Dramen und Sheridans Pizarro. Archiv. Vol. LXXXI. 1893. Baumann, L. Die englischen Ubersetzungen von Goethes Faust. Halle, 1907. Brandl, A. Die Aufnahme von Goethes Jugendwerken in England. GoetheJahrbuch. III. 1882. Carr, M. Goethe in his connection with English Literature. Publ. of the English Goethe Society. Vol. IV. 1890. Gillet, J. E. A Forgotten German Creditor of the English Stage [Kotzebue]. Nineteenth Century. Pp. 783 ff. April 1912. Haney, J. L. German Literature in England before 1790. Americana Germanica. Vol. IV. 1902. Hauhart, W. F. The reception of Goethe's Faust in England in the first half of the nineteenth century. New York, 1909. Heinemann, W. Goethes Faust in England und Amerika. Berlin, 1886. Hlerzfeld, G. Zur Geschichte der deutschen Literatur in England. Archiv. Vol. cx, 1 and 2. 1903. - Zur Geschichte von Burgers Lenore in England. Archiv. Vol. cvI. 1901. Kenwood, S. H. Lessing in England. Mod. Language Review. Pp. 197 ff. 1914. Koeppel, F. Kotzebue in England. Englische Studien. Vol. xIII, pp. 530 ff. 1891. Mackenzie, H. The German Theatre. Edinburgh Royal society. 1788. Margraf, E. Einfluss der deutschen Literatur auf die englische am Ende des 18. und im ersten Drittel des 19. Jahrhunderts. Diss. Leipzig, 1901. Oswald, E. Goethe in England and America. Bibliography. 2nd edn. 1909. Passow, A. Deutschlands Einfiuss auf die englische Literatur. Magazin fur Literatur. Pp. 437, 452. 1878. Rea, T. Schiller's Dramas and Poems in England. 1906. Sachs, C. Schillers Beziehungen zur englischen Literatur. Archiv. Vol. xxx. 1861. Sanborn, F. B. Goethe's Relations to English Literature, in Dudley, Poetry and Philosophy of Goethe. 1906. Sellier, W. Kotzebue in England. Ein Beitrag zur Geschichte der englischen Biihne und der Beziehungen der deutschen Literatur zur englischen. Diss. Leipzig, 1901.Supplementary Bibliography 527 Stail-Holstein, Baroness. Germany. Translated from the French. 3 vols. 1813. New York, 1871. Tait, J. The literary influence of Goethe's Faust in England. 1832-52. Transactions of the Ianchester Goethe Society. 1894. Todt, W. Lessing in England. Heidelberg, 1912. Weddigen, F. H. 0. Geschichte der Einwirkungen der deutschen Literatur auf die Literaturen der iibrigen europaischen Kulturvolker der Neuzeit. Leipzig, 1882. - ermittler des deutschen Geistes in England und Nordamerika. Archiv. Vol. LIX. 1878. Weddigen, F.. 0. F. Freiligrath als Vermittler englischer und franzosischer Dichtung. Archiv. Vol. LX. 1879. Zeiger, T. Beitrage zur Geschichte der deutsch-englischen Literaturbeziehungen. Wordsworth, Southey, Shelley. Studien zur vergleichenden Literaturgeschichte. Vol. I. 1901. - Beitrage zur Geschichte des Einflusses der neueren deutschen Literatur auf die englische. Diss. Leipzig, 1902. The following works may be added to the bibliographies of Coleridge and Wordsworth in vol. xi. Arnold, MI. Joubert and Coleridge. 1880. Eichler, A. (Ed.). Coleridge's Ancient Mariner and Christabel. Wiener Beitrige zur englischen Philologie. 1907. Ferrier, J. F. On Coleridge's Indebtedness to German philosophy. Blackwood's Magazine. March 1840. Haney, J. L. The German Influence on S. T. Coleridge. Diss. Philadelphia, 1903. Helmholtz, A. A. The Indebtedness of S. T. Coleridge to A. W. Schlegel. Wisconsin, 1907. Laurent, R. Etudes anglaises. Coleridge. Le preraphaelisme en Angleterre. Paris, 1910. Machule, P. Coleridges Wallensteiniibersetzung. Englische Studien. Vol. xxxi, pp. 182 ff. 1902. Shawcross, J. (Ed.). Coleridge's Biographia literaria. (On the influence of German philosophy.) Heller, 0. Goethe and Wordsworth. Mod. Language Notes. Vol. xiv. 1899. Mensch, R. Goethe and Wordsworth. Publ. of the English Goethe Society. Vol. vII. 1893. Miller, E. A. Wordsworth and W. Miiller. Americana Germanica. Vol. II. 1900. Texte, J. W. Wordsworth et la poesie lakiste en France. Revue des deux Mondes. 15 July 1896 (ttudes de litterature europeenne, Paris, 1898, pp. 147 ff.).

J. G. ROBERTSON.TABLE OF PRINCIPAL DATES

1712 J. J. Rousseau born (d. 1778). 1731 The Gentleman's Magazine. 1732 The London Magazine. 1749 Goethe born (d. 1832). 1749 The Monthly Review. 1759 Porson born (d. 1808). 1760-1820 George III. 1763 Rousseau's Contrat Social. 1766 Lessing's Laohoon. 1770 Wordsworth born (d. 1850). 1771 Walter Scott born (d. 1832). 1772 Coleridge born (d. 1834). 1773 Goethe's Gbtz von Berlichingen (Scott's translation, 1799). 1774 Goethe's Sorrows of Werther. 1775 Jane Austen born (d. 1817). 1775 Charles Lamb born (d. 1834). 1778 Hazlitt born (d. 1830). 1778 Byron born (d. 1824). 1779 Lessing's Nathan der Weise. 1781 Rousseau's Confessions. 1792 Shelley born (d. 1822). 1792 Keble born (d. 1866). 1792 Rogers's The Pleasures of Memory. 1793 The British Critic. 1794 Grote born (d. 1871). 1795 Carlyle born (d. 1881). 1795 Keats born (d. 1821). 1795 Lindley Murray's English Grammar. 1796 The Monthly Magazine. 1798 Landor's Gebir. 1798-9 Schiller's Wallenstein (trans. Coleridge, 1800). 1799 Campbell's The Pleasures of Hope. 1799 SirW.Jones's Collected Works. 1800 Pusey born (d. 1882) 1800 Bloomfield's TheFarmersBoy. 1801 Newman born (d. 1890). 1802 Second edition of Porson's Praefatio ad Hecubam. 1802 The Edinburgh Review. 1802-3 Scott's Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border. 1805 Cary's trans. of The Inferno. 1805 Scott's The Lay of the Last Mliinstrel.

1807 Byron's Hours of Idleness. 1807 Lamb's TalesfromShahespear. 1808 Scott's Marnion. 1808 Lamb's Specimens of English Dramatic Poets. 1808-21 The Examiner (ed. Leigh Hunt). 1809 Byron's English Bards and Scotch Reviewers. 1809 The Quarterly Review. 1810 Scott's The Lady of the Lake. 1811 Jane Austen's Sense and Sensibility. 1812 Landor's Count Julian. 1812 J. and H. Smith's Rejected Addresses. 1812-18 Byron's Childe Harold's Pilgrimage. 1813 Shelley's Queen Mab. 1813 Jane Austen's Pride and Prejudice. 1813 Scott's Roheby. 1813 Byron's The Bride of Abydos and The Giaour. 1814 Scott's Waverley. 1814 The New Monthly Magazine. 1814 Byron's The Corsair and Lara. 1814 Jane Austen's Mansfield Park. 1814 Jeffrey's article on The Excursion in The Edinburgh Review. 1815 Scott's Guy Mannering. 1816 Byron leaves England. 1816 Shelley's Alastor. 1816 Jane Austen's Emma. 1816 Scott's The Antiquary, Old Mortality and The Black Dwarf. 1816 Byron's Parisina and The Siege of Corinth. 1817 Chalmers's Astronomical Discourses. 1817 Coleridge's Biographia Literaria. 1817 Moore's Lalla Rookh. 1817 Hazlitt's The Round Table. 1817 Byron's Manfred. 1817 Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine.Trable of Principal Dates

529

1817 Hazlitt's Characters of Shakespeare's Plays. 1818 Scott's The Lord of the Isles, The Heart of Midlothian and Rob Roy. 1818 Byron's Beppo. 1818 Shelley's Laon and Cythna (The Revolt of Islam). 1818 Keats's Endynion. 1818 Hazlitt's A View of the English Stage and Lectures on the English Poets. 1818 Jane Austen's Northanger Abbey and Persuasion. 1818 Susan E. Ferrier's Mlarriage. 1818 Mary W. Shelley's Frankenstein. 1819 Scott's The Bride of Lammermoor and The Legend of MIontrose. 1819 Shelley's The Cenci. 1819 Hazlitt's Lectures on the English Comic Writers and Political Essays. 1819-24 Byron's Don Juan. 1820 Hazlitt's Lectures on the Dramatic Literature of the Age of Elizabeth. 1820 The London Mlagazine (Lamb, Hazlitt, Keats,DeQuincey,lHunt). 1820 The Retrospective Review. 1820 Shelley'sP]rometheus Unbound. 1820 Keats's Lamia, Isabella and The Eve of St Agnes, etc. 1820 Scott's Ivanhoe, The Abbot and The Monastery. 1820 Clare's Poems. 1820-30 George IV. 1821 Shelley's Epipsychidion and A donais. 1821 Scott's Kenilworth. 1821 Byron's Cain and Mlfarino Faliero, The Two Foscari, Sardanapalus. 1821 Gait's The Annals of The Parish. 1821-2 Hazlitt's Table Talk. 1822 De Quincey's Confessions of an English Opium Eater. (In The London Magazine, 1821.) 1822 Noctes Ambrosianae written for Blackwood. 1822 Scott's The Pirate, The Fortunes of Nigel, Peveril of the Peak. E. L. XII.

1822 Beddoes's TheBride's Tragedy. 1822 Wells's Stories after Nature. 1822 Lockhart's Adam Blair. 1822-8 Rogers's Italy. 1823 Scott's Quentin Durward. 1823 Lamb's Elia. 1824 Scott's Redgauntlet. 1824 Wells's Joseph and his Brethren. 1824 The Westminster Review. 1824-53 Landor's Imaginary Conversations. 1825 Hazlitt's The Spirit of theAge. 1825 Death of Samuel Parr. 1826 Scott's Woodstock. 1826 Hazlitt's The Plain Speaker. 1827 Barley's Sylvia. 1827 Hood's The Plea of the Midsummer Fairies. 1827 Pollok's The Course of Time. 1827 Keble's The Christian Year. 1828 Moilrs Mansie Wtauch. 1829 Croly's Salathiel. 1830 Traser's Magazine. 1831 Erskine's The Brazen Serpent. 1831 Elliott's Corn-law Rhymes. 1832 Tait's Edinburgh lAagazine. 1832 Chambers's Journal 1833 Keble's National Apostasy, the beginning of the Oxford movement. 1833 Hartley Coleridge's Poems. 1833 Lamb's The Last Essays of Elia. 1833-4 Carlyle's Sartor Resartus appears in Fraser. 1833 ff. Tracts for the Times. 1834 Taylor's Philip van Artevelde. 1834 Myers's Catholic Thoughts. 1834 Marryat's Jacob Faithful and Peter Simple. 1834-43 Newman's Parochial and Plain Sermons. 1835 Strauss's Life of Jesus. 1835-44 Thirlwall's A History of Greece. 1836 Scott's Tom Cringle's Log. 1836 Marryat's Mr ilidshipman Easy. 1836 Mrs Gore's Mrs Armytage. 1836 The Dublin Review. 1836 Lyra Apostolica. 1836 Landor's Pericles and Aspasia. 34530

Table of Principal Dates

1837 Sarah Coleridge's Phantasmion. 1837 Landor's Pentameron. 1837-8 Lockhart's Memoirs of Scott. 1838-9 R. H. Froude's Remains. 1838-43 Arnold's History of Rome. 1838-85 The Library of the Fathers. 1839 Wiseman's article on the Donatists in The Dublin Review. 1840 Barham's The Ingoldsby Legends. 1840 Coleridge's Confessions of an Enquiring Spirit. 1841 Tract 90. 1843 Liddell and Scott's A GreekEnglish Lexicon. 1843-7 Martineau's Endeavours after the Christian Life. 1844 Chambers's Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation. 1844 Finlay's Greece under the Romans. 1844 Stanley's Life of Arnold. 1844 Ward's The Ideal of a Christian Church. 1844 Barnes's Poems of Rural Life in the Dorset Dialect. 1844 The North British Review. 1845 Newman's An Essay on the Development of Christian Doctrine. 1845 Newman received into the Roman Catholic church. 1845-56 Grote's History of Greece. 1846 R. E. Landor's The Fawn of Sertorius. 1847 Leigh Hunt's Men, Women and Books. 1848 Leigh Hunt's The Town. 1848 Catherine Crowe's The Night Side of Nature. 1848 Layard's Nineveh. 1849 Froude's The Nemesis of Faith. 1850 Tennyson's In Memoriam. 1850 Beddoes's Death's Jest Book (first form finished in 1829) 1850 F. W. Newman's Phases of Faith. 1850-64 Merivale's History of the Romans under the Empire. 1853 Mayor's Juvenal. 1853 Maurice's Theological Essays. 1854-5 Milman's The History of Latin Christianity.

1855 Leigh Hunt's The Old Court Suburb. 1855 G. C. Lewis's Credibility of Early Roman History. 1855 ff. Robertson's Sermons (posthumous). 1857 W. H. Smith's Thorndale. 1860 Essays and Reviews. 1862 The Cornhill Magazine. 1862-79 Colenso's The Pentateuch. 1863 Freeman's History of Federal Government, vol. I. 1863-76 Stanley's Lectures on the History of the Jewish Church. 1864 Newman's Apologia pro vita sua. 1864 Munro's Lucretius. 1864 Praed's Poems (collected). 1865 Seeley's Ecce Homo. 1866 Newman's The Dream of Gerontius. 1866 Hinton's The Mystery of Pain. 1869 Hawker's Cornish Ballads. 1870 Newman's An Essay in aid of a Grammar of Assent. 1870 Church's Life of St Anselm. 1871 Hutton's Essays, Theological and Literary. 1871 Erskine's The Spiritual Order (posthumous). 1871 Jowett's The Dialogues of Plato. 1875 Pattison's Isaac Casaubon. 1875-88 Robertson Smith's articles in The Encyclopaedia Britannica 9th edn. 1879 Church's Spenser. 1879-87 M. Muller's Sacred Books of the East. 1880-3 Arber's English Garner. 1880-99 Hodgkin's Italy and her Invaders. 1881 Westcott and Hort's The New Testament. 1882 Seeley's Natural Religion. 1883 Drummond's Natural Law in the Spiritual WHorld. 1883 ff. Jebb's Sophocles. 1891 Church's The Oxford Movement. 1894 Skeat's Chaucer. 1894 Tyrrell's External Religion. 1897 Tyrrell's Nova et Vetera. 1898 Tyrrell's Hard Sayings.CORRIGENDA VOL. III p. 459, 1. 13 after all add others2 And add as footnote 2See Bacon's Essays, ed. West, A. S., p. 293. VOL. VII p. 439 for Scoanes read Scoones VOL. X p. 2, 1. 24 for Devonshire read Derbyshire p. 112, 1. 30 for canto read cento p. 507, 1. 4 for XI read XVI VOL. XI p. 27, 1. 17 for post-master read stamp distributor p. 34, 1. 18 between shown and by insert his descendant p. 180, 1. 2 for rimed read rhythmed p. 445, 1. 33 Whistle Binkie should be a separate entry above Wilson, Alexander p. 446, 1. 17 for 1812 read 1912 p. 482, 1. 30 for Martha Mary read Mary Martha VOL. XII p. 4, 1. 13 for Shortrede read Shortreed p. 21, 1. 19 for Hatterick read Hatteraick p. 25, 1. 3 for Headrig read Headrigg p. 37, 1. 2; p. 38, 1. 24; p. 76, 1. 36; and p. 404 for Trelawney read Trelawny p. 79, 11. 7, 8, 12 for Clark read Clarke p. 88, 1. 11 for Otto read Otho p. 124, 1. 14 for Ode to read Prayer for p. 235, 1. 1 for December 1815 read 1816 p. 240, 1. 41 and p. 241, 1. 30 for Musgrave read Musgrove p. 245, 1. 9 and p. 449, 1. 1 for Edmondstone read Edmonstone p. 250, 1. 37 and p. 451, 1. 7 for 1837 read 1834 p. 251, last line for Frank read Frederick p. 269, 1. 11 for 1838 read 1837 1. 13 for 1859 read 1852 p. 286, 1. 4 for Richard Denn read Renn Dickson p. 288, 11. 36-38 for They...(1828-32) read Thirlwall translated Schleiermacher's St Luke (1825) and collaborated with Hare in the translation of Niebuhr's History of Roume (1828 1832) p. 298, 1. 29 for Henry read Hill p. 303, 1. 8 for (1828-42) read (1838-43) p. 310, 1. 18 for James read John footnote, 1. 6 for 30 read 34 1. 7 for 1850-1 read 1845-50 p. 317, 1. 10 for Wilson read Wilkinson p. 318, 1. 9 for (1839) read (1829) p. 323, 1. 23 for Chantry read Chantrey p. 330, 1. 4 and bibliography for William read Williams pp. 344, 354 and 367 footnotes, for xiII read xiv p. 349, 1. 5 for Archdale read Archdall p. 364, 1. 42 for G. read J. p. 419, 1. 12 for 1877 read 1817 p. 472, 1. 46 for 1789 read 1798 p. 484, 1. 22 for Edward read Edwin p. 510, 1. 7 for Fosbrooke...1776 read Fosbroke...1770 p. 512, 1. 29 for L. read J. p. 516, 1. 7 for 181.0- read 1820 -p. 518, l. 15 for 1785 read 1758Blank pageINDEX OF NAMES [The letters ff. after an entry imply that references to the same subject occur on at least two immediately succeeding pages. Birth and death dates are not, as a rule, given in the case of writers whose chief work is treated in other volumes.]

Abbey Mill farm, in Jane Austen's Emma, 240 Abbotsford, 6, 20, 28, 154, 372 - club, 358 Abbott, Evelyn (1843-1901), 479 Abeken, Caspar, Life and letters of Cicero, 306 Aberdeen, 31, 359; university, 296, 333, 342 Aberfoil, 17 Abraham, 321 Academy, The, 347 Acton, John Emerich Edward DalbergActon, lord, 272, 430; On the Study of History, 303 Adah, in Byron's Cain, 48 Adam, in Paradise Lost, 85 James (1860-1907), 479; The Religious Teachers of Greece, 333; The Vitality of Platonism, 333 - Thomas (1701-1784), 471 Adamnan, Life of St Columba, 361 Adams, Francis (1796-1861), 479 -Sarah (1805-1848), 413 -William (1814-1848), 447 Addison, Joseph, 177, 218, 221 Adlard, H., engraver, 323 Adonais, in Shelley's poem, 74 Adriatic sea, 33, 63 Adventurer, The, 363 Aelfric society, 355 Aeschylus, 93, 99, 265, 328, 331, 333 Agamemnon, 318, 329, 334 Choephoroe, 329, 334 Persae, 329 Prometheus, 64, 65, 329 Septem, 329 Laurentian manuscript of, 324 Aetna, 335, 337 Afghanistan, 352 Agathocles, 316 Aholibamah, in Byron's Heaven and Earth, 48 Ainsworth, William Harrison (1805-1882), 430, 431, 447, 448 Guy Fawkes, 250 Jack Sheppard, 250

Lancashire Witches, The, 250 Old St Paul's, 250 Rookwood, 250 South Sea Bubble, The, 250 Tower of London, The, 250 Akenside, Mark, 97 Akerman, John Yonge (1806-1873), 507 Akinetos, in Horne's Orion, 118 Albania, 32, 42, 43 Albert, prince consort, 311 Albion, The, 187, 188 Alcaeus, 329 Alcinous, 198 Alexander the great, 309, 313, 315, 331 I, emperor of Russia, 39 Alexandrines, 88, 229 Alfieri, Vittorio, count, 33, 40, 47, 49 Alford, Henry (1810-1871), 340, 500 Ali pasha, 32 Alice, in Lamb's Essays of Elia, 182, 186 Allen, Henry Ellis, 338, 479 -John, 144 -Thomas (1803-1833), 507 Allsop, Thomas, 199, 200 Alps, the, 44, 47, 61, 63, 64 Althorp library, 365, 366 Ambrose, saint, 266 Ambrose's tavern, 159 America, 89, 165, 316 American scholars, 340 Ames, Joseph (1689-1759), Typographical Antiquities, 362, 366, 520 Amiens, 341 Amwell, Hertfordshire, 191 Anacreon, 223 Anderson, Joseph (b. 1832), 507 - Robert (1770-1833), 413 Anglican church, 134, 275, 291, 299 Anglo-Roman hierarchy, 274 Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, 344 Annals of the Four Masters, 360 Annual Register, The, 138 Anstey, Christopher, 7, 120 Anthropological society, 350 Antigone, 68 Anti-Jacobin, The, 150 Antioch, 107 34-2532 Index o Antwerp, 365 Apennines, the, 63 Apollo, in Keats's The Fall of Hyperion, 80, 86 Aquinas, Thomas, 201 Arabi pasha, 342 Arabia, 342 Arabian Nights, The, 342 Arabic language and literature, 341, 342, 362 Arber, Edward (1836-1912), 357, 515 Arblay, Frances Burney, madame de, 133; Camilla, 231; Evelina, 233 Arbuthnot, John, 168 Archaeological association, 349 Archdall, Mervyn, 349 Archer-Hind, Richard Dacre (1849-1910), 333, 479 Arden of Feversham, 186 Arethusa, in Keats's Endymion, 82 Argyll, Archibald Campbell, marquis of, 21, 29 -- John Campbell, second duke of, 19 Ariel, 196, 220 Arimanes, spirits of, in Byron's Manfred, 47 Ariosto, Ludovico, 3, 80 Aristarchus, 332 Aristophanes, 309, 324, 325, 329 ff.; Birds, 329 Aristotle, 211, 230, 311 Constitution of Athens, 340 Ethics, 334 Poetics, 334 Politics, 333, 334 Rhetoric, 328, 331 Armytage, Mrs, Mrs Gore's, 246 Arnold, Matthew, 77, 108, 154, 177, 178, 207, 208, 297; Resignation, 220 - Thomas (1795-1842), 153, 259, 287-8, 292, 294, 302 ff. (main entry), 309, 318, 321, 338, 464, 474 History of Rome, 303, 304, 339 History of the later Roman Commonwealth, 303 Life and Correspondence, 303, 304, 320 Arnold, Thomas (junior) (1823-1900), 504 -- William Thomas, 474; Roman System of Provincial Administration, 304 Arthur, king, 13, 354 Articles, the XXXIX, 260, 296 Ashton, Lucy, in Scott's Bride of Lammermoor, 22 Sir William, in Scott's Bride of Lammermoor, 22 Asia, 66 Asiatic society of Bengal, 352 Aspland, Robert (1782-1845), 465 Assaye, battle of, 98 Assyria, 342 Astarte, in Byron's Manfred, 47 Athanase, in Shelley's Prince Athanase, 61 Athanasius, Festal Letters, 341 Athenaeum, The, 349, 359, 365 Athenaeus, 325 Athenian democracy, 311, 312

f Names Athens, 32, 72, 312, 313; Parthenon, 340; temple of Theseus, 39 Atherstone, Edwin (1788-1872), 129, 413; The Fall of Nineveh, 128 Atkinson, Robert, 361, 362, 515 Attic idiom, 328 law, 327 orators, 329 'Atticus,' in Dibdin's Bibliomania, 365 Auban, Vie de Seint, 362 Auchinleck press, 357 Augustan school of poetry, 36, 40, 41, 43, 77 Augustine, saint, 260 Augustus, emperor of Rome, 304 Aurelian, emperor of Rome, 304 Aurelius, Marcus, 307; Meditations, 335 Austen, Cassandra, 232, 237 Charles, 239 Jane (1775-1817), 24, 231 ff. (main entry), 246, 247, 252, 446 Elinor and Marianne, 233, 236 Emma, 151, 234, 239 First Impressions (Pride and Prejudice), 233, 234 Kitty, or The Bower, 233 Lady Susan, 233 Mansfield Park, 234, 238, 241 Northanger Abbey, 233 ff., 247 Persuasion, 234, 235, 237, 238, 240, 241 Pride and Prejudice, 233 ff., 237, 238, 241, 243 Sense and Sensibility, 233 ff., 241 Susan, 234 Watsons, The, 234 Austen-Leigh, J. E., Memoir of Jane Austen, 233, 234 -W. and R. A., Jane Austen, 232, 234, 239 Austerlitz, battle of, 166 Austin, Mrs, Shakespeare in Paris, 153 Australia, 119 Austria, 50 Avebury, Sir John Lubbock, lord (1834 -1913), 511; Prehistoric Times, 348; The Origin of Civilization, 348 Avianus, 337 Babington, Churchill (1821-1889), 331, 480 Babrius, 339 Babylonia, 342 Bacchus, in Keats's Endymion, 82 Bacchylides, 332; Odes, 340 Bacon, in Lamb's Mr H, 189 -Francis, viscount St Albans, 363 Badham, Charles (1813-1884), 330, 480 Bagdad, caliph of, 55 Bagehot, Walter, 179, 431; Literary Studies, 152 Bagnet, Mrs, 125 Bailey, Philip James, Festus, 114 Baillie, Joanna (1762-1851), 12, 413; Chough and the Crow, The, 125; Good night, 125; On the passions, 124 Bain, Joseph, 515 Baines, Edward (1774-1848), 507Index of Baker, George (1781-1851), 507; History and Antiquities of Northamptonshire, 346 Thomas, History of St John's College, 326 Balderstone, Caleb, in Scott's Bride of Lammermoor. 23 Balfour, Alexander (1767-1829), 448 Balkan peninsula, 32, 42 Ballad society, 355 Ballantyne, James, 5, 12, 372 -- John, The Novelist's Library, 2, 366 Ballymote, Boolk of, 362 Balochistan, 352 Balzac, Honore de, 20; Comedie Humaine, 54 Bampfylde, John Codrington (1754-1796), 132, 413 Country enjoyment, 133 Evening, 133 Morning, 133 The Sea, 133 To the River Teign, 133 Bampton lectures, 273, 286, 294 Bandon, county Cork, 165 Bannatyne club, 358, 359, 361, 370 George, 358 Bannister, John, 171 Bannockburn, battle of, 1 Barabbas, in Marlowe's Jew of Malta, 68 Barante, baron de, 322 Barbauld, Anna Letitia (born Aikin), 4, 124, 133 Barbour, John, Bruce, 13, 344 Barham, Richard Harris (1788-1845), 111, 122-3 (main entry), 138, 413; As I lay a thynkynge, 122; The Ingoldsby Legends, 122, 123 Barker, Edmund Henry (1788-1839), 327 Barnes, William (1801-1886), 134, 413 Barnwell priory, 348 Barrow, Sir John, 154 Barton, in Jane Austen's Sense and Sensibility, 241 - Bernard (1784-1849), 135, 198 ff., 413, 438 Basil, saint, 266 Bateman, Thomas (1821-1861), 507 Bates, Cadwallader John, 507; Border Holds of Northumberland, 349 Miss, in Jane Austen's Emma, 240 Bath, 232, 236 Baucida, 201 Baucis, 201 Bayley, John [Whitcomb], 507 Bayly, Thomas Haynes (1797-1839), 130, 414 Beach, Michael Hicks, 143 Beaconsfield, Benjamin Disraeli, earl of, Coningsby, 155 Beatrice, in Dante's Divine Comedy, 85, 86 in Middleton's Changeling, 222 Beattie, James, 100. 132 Beaumont, Francis, 89, 186 Becker, W. A., Charicles, 230; Gallus, 230 Becket, Thomas, 258, 321 Beddoe, John (1826-1911), 507; Anthropological History of Europe, 351; Con

Names 533 tributions to Scottish Ethnology, 350; The Races of Britain, 350 Beddoes, Thomas Lovell (1803-1849), 107, 115 ff. (main entry), 126, 139, 414 Bride's Tragedy, The, 115 Death's Jest Book or The Fool's Revenge, 115, 116 Dirge for Wolfram, 116 Dream-Pedlary, 116 Improvisatore, The, 115 Letter from Oxford, 116 Old Adam, the carrion crow, 116 Pygmalion, 116 Song of the Stygian Naiades, 116 Bedfordshire, 345 Beeching, H. C., 257 Beethoven, Ludwig van, 64, 268 Behn, Mrs Aphra, 246 Belial, 36 Bell, Henry Glassford (1803-1874), 414 Peter, in Wordsworth's poem, 70 Bellenden, Edith, in Scott's Old Mortality, 22 W illiam, 326 Beloe, William (1756-1817), 520; Anecdotes of Literature, 363; The Sexagenarian, 363 Belsham, Thomas (1750-1829), 465 Belshazzar, 229 Bendall, Cecil (1856-1906), 602 Bennet, Elizabeth, in Jane Austen's Pride and Prejudice, 237 ff., 243 Jane, in Jane Austen's Pride and Prejudice, 238 Mr, in Jane Austen's Pride and Prejudice, 238 - Mrs, in Jane Austen's Pride and Prejudice, 238 Bensly, Robert Lubbock (1831-1893), 341, 503 Bent, James Theodore (1852-1897), 496 Bentham, James (1708-1794), 507 Jeremy, 152, 309 Bentley, Richard, 324, 325, 332 Beowulf, 344 Beppo, in Byron's poem, 53 Berkeley, George, 60 Bermuda, 103 Bernardo, in Shelley's The Cenci, 69 Berni, Francesco, 33, 52, 56 Bertha, in Keats's Eve of St Mark's, 87 Bertram, in Scott's Rokeby, 12 - Charles, 336 - Edmund, in Jane Austen's Mansfield Park, 238, 239 - Godfrey, laird of Ellangowan, in Scott's Guy Mannering, 29, 151 - Lady, in Jane Austen's Mansfield Park, 239 -- Lucy, in Scott's Guy Mannering, 22 Sir Thomas, in Jane Austen's Mansfield Park, 239, 241 the misses, in Jane Austen's Mansfield Park, 238, 243 Besant, Sir Walter (1836-1901), 507; A Survey of London, 349 Bethune, Alexander (1804-1843), 414534

Index of Names

Bhagavadgftd, the, 343 Bible, the, 156, 177, 280, 282 if., 293, 295, 318, 331; Chinese, 342; Greek, 340; Hebrew, 341; Sanskrit, 343; Syriac (Gospels), 341 Pentateuch, 296; Genesis, 48; Job, 341; Ecclesiastes, 341; Song of Songs, 341 - New Testament, 286, 290, 293, 297, 298, 340 (revised version); Gospels, 280; John, 340; Pauline epistles, 340; epistles of St John, 340; Hebrews, 340 Bibliographical society, 355, 369, 519 Bickersteth, Edward (1786-1850), 471 Henry. See Langdale, lord Bigod, Ralph, in Lamb's Essays of Elia, 188 Biliotti, l~douard, 339 Billings, Robert William (1813-1874), 507 Bingley, in Jane Austen's Pride and Prejudice, 238 Biographical Dictionary (society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge), 307 Biographisches Jahrbuch, 332 Birch, Samuel (1813-1885), 500; Book of the Dead, 342; Hieroglyphical Grammar and Dictionary, 342; History of Ancient Pottery, 342 Bird, William, 181 Birks, Thomas Rawson (1810-1883), 471 Birmingham, 174, 184, 279 Birrenswark. in Dumfriesshire, 350 Blachford, Frederic Rogers, lord, Letters, 277 Black, A. and C., publishers, 372 Black Knight, the, in Scott's Ivanhoe, 18 Blackie, John Stuart (1809-1895), 335, 480 Blackmore, Sir Richard, 128 Blackwood, William, publisher, 156, 157, 159,161; Annals of a Publishing House, 159 Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine (' Maga'), 36, 141, 153, 154, 155 ff. (main entry), 221, 425 Blades, William (1824-1890), 520 Blakesley, Joseph Williams (1808-1885), 330, 480 Blakesware, in Widford, 182, 186,189, 191 Blanchard, Samuel Laman (1804-1845), 131, 414 Blaquiere, captain, 38 Blaydes, Frederick H. M. (1818-1908), 480 Blenheim palace, 173, 192 Blessington, Charles John Gardiner, 1st earl of, 37 Marguerite, countess of, Conversations, 37 Blomfield, Charles James (1786-1857), 291, 325, 327, 328, 329 (main entry), 481 Edward Valentine (1788-1816), 481 Bloomfield, Robert (1766-1823), 131, 132, 139, 414 Blunt, Henry (1794-1843), 471 Boccaccio, Giovanni, 58, 168, 217, 365; Decameron, 53, 82

Boeckh, Philipp August, The Public Economy of Athens, 301, 339 Bohn, Henry George (1796-1884), 520; Antiquarian Library, 368; Guinea Catalogue, 368 Boiardo, Matteo Maria, 3 Boileau-Despreaux, Nicolas, 104 Bonar, Horatius (1808-1889), 471 Bond, Sir Edward Augustus (1815-1898), 356, 515 - Thomas (1765-1837), 508 Bonn, 302 Bonnivard, in Byron's Prisoner of Chillon, 46 Booth, Junius Brutus, 171 Border, the, 255 ballads, 3 Borough muir, the, in Scott's Marmion, 10 Borowlaski, count, 22 Boswell, Sir Alexander (1775-1822), 357, 515 - James, Life of Johnson, 363 Bosworth, Joseph (1789-1876), 344, 504 Botany bay, 195 Botfield, Beriah (1807-1863), 355, 365, 515 Bourgh, lady Catherine de, in Jane Austen's Pride and Prejudice, 238 Bourne, Henry (1696-1733), The Antiquities of the Common People, 346 Bournemouth, 331 Boutell, Charles (1812-1877), 508 Bowden, John William (1798-1844), 258, 454, 455 Bowles, Caroline. See Southey, Caroline W illiam Lisle, 100, 133, 183 Bowring, Sir John, 38, 310, 430 Bowyer, William, Literary Anecdotes, 345 Boyle lectures, 306 R obert, 363 Boythorn, in Dickens's Bleak House, 205, 208 Bradley, A. C., 77 Bradshaw, Henry (1831-1886), 520; Collected Papers, 369; 'Memoranda,' 369 Brahmi alphabet, the, 352 Brand, John (1744-1806), 346, 508 Brandon, colonel, in Jane Austen's Sense and Sensibility, 327 Brantwood, 372 Brawne, Fanny, 92 Bray, Charles (1811-1884), 465 - William (1736-1832), 508 Brayley, Edward Wedlake (1773-1854), 345, 508 Bremond, abbe, 299 Brewer, John Sherren (1810-1879), 356 Bridgewater, Mrs. See Hazlitt, Mrs Bridgman, Richard Whalley (1761?1820), 520 Bright, William (1824-1901), 474; Chapters of Early English Church History, 322; History of the Church, 321 Brighton, 291 Brimblecombe, John, in Kingsley's Westward Ho!, 102Index of Names

535

Brinton, Sybil G., Old Friends and New Fancies, 244 Bristol, 340; St Mary Redcliffe church, 345 Britain, Roman, 347 Britanniae, De Situ, 336 British academy, 332 -archaeological association, 347 - school of archaeology at Athens, 340 -- -- - at Rome, 340 - - in Egypt,339 British Critic, The, 259, 273, 453 -- Magazine, The, 257, 453, 454 Britomart, in Spenser's Faerie Queene, 61, 87 Britton, John (1771-1857), 508 Architectural Antiquities of Great Britain, 345 Beauties of England and Wales, 345 Beauties of Wiltshire, 345 Cathedral Antiquities, 345 'Picturesque Antiquities of English Cities,' 345 Brougham, Henry Peter Brougham, lord, 32, 143 ff., 147, 426; 'The Crisis in the Sugar Colonies,' 145 Brown, Charles Armitage, 83 ff., 91, 93 - Lucky, 3 -- Vanbeest, in Scott's Guy Mannering, 17, 18 Browne, Felicia Dorothea. See Hemans, Mrs - Sir Thomas, 169, 176, 197; The Garden of Cyrus, 197; Hydriotaphia, 197; Pseudodoxia Epidemica, 197 - William, 79, 93 Browning, Elizabeth Barrett, 106, 118,124 Robert, 106, 113, 115, 118, 154, 177, 178, 219, 223; Bells and Pomegranates, 101; Christmas Eve and Easter Day, 100 Brownlow, W. R., 508 Bruce, Alexander Balmain (1831-1899), 465 - John, 354, 515 -John Collingwood (1805-1892), 508; Lapidarium Septentrionale, 346 Brussels, 365 Bryce, James Bryce, viscount, 271 Brydges, Sir Samuel Egerton (1762-1837), 520; The British Bibliographer, 364; Censura Literaria, 363; Restituta, 364 Buccleugh, in Scott's Lay of the Last Minstrel, 8 - duchess of, 7 Buchan, David Steuart Erskine, 11th earl of, 149 Buddhist topes, 353 Burger, Gottfried August, 6, 7; Leonore, 4; Der wilde Jdger, 4 'Bull, John,' 230 Bulwer-Lytton. See Lytton, lord Bunion, Miss, in Thackeray's Mrs Perkins's Ball, 125 Bunsen, baron C. C. J., 283, 302, 303; Biblical Researches, 295 Bunyan, John, 169

Burges, George (1786?-1864), 327 Burgess, Thomas (1756-1837), 481 Burgon, John William (1813-1888), 274, 455 Burke, Edmund, 168, 169, 175; Letter to a Noble Lord, 166 Burley, in Scott's Old Mortality, 22 Burn, Robert (1829-1904), 496 Burnell, Arthur Coke (1840-1882), 502 Burney, Charles, 325 - Fanny. See Arblay, madame de - artin, 188, 192 Burnouf, Jean Louis, 343 Burns, Robert, 1, 19, 30, 125, 132, 134; 'Hear, land o',Cakes,' 349; It was a' for our Richtfu' King, 14; 'Ken ye ought o' Captain Grose,' 349 Burton, John Hill (1809-1881), 520; The Book-Hunter, 359, 360, 371; History of Scotland, 371 -- Robert, Anatomy of Melancholy, 86, 88, 187, 188 Bury, lady Charlotte Susan Maria (1775 -1861), 448 Bury St Edmunds, 192, 201, 331 Butcher, Samuel Henry (1850-1910), 332, 333, 481 Butler, Arthur John, 137 Joseph, 269; The Analogy of Religion, 270 Samuel (1774-1839), 327 ff., 481; Atlas of Ancient Geography, 328 Byron, George Gordon, 6th lord (1788 -1824), 15, 30, 31 ff. (main entry), 57, 60 ff., 67, 74, 76, 81, 92, 96, 98, 100, 102, 106, 111, 120, 122, 126, 131, 135, 136, 162, 174, 179, 180, 199, 205, 219, 228, 247, 314, 318, 382 ff. Age of Bronze, The, 37 Beppo, 33, 34, 52, 53, 63 Blues, The, 37 Bride of Abydos, The, 32, 45 Cain, 35, 47, 48 Childe Harold, 32, 34, 38, 42 ff., 60, 145, 158 Childish Recollections, 41 Corsair, The, 32, 44, 45 Darkness, 51 Death of Calmar and Orla, The, 40 Deformed Transformed, The, 37, 50 Don Juan, 32 ff., 37, 40, 46, 51, 52, 54 ff., 71, 95 Dorset, To the Duke of, 41 Dream, The, 51 Elegy on Newstead Abbey, 41 English Bards and Scotch Reviewers, 32, 41, 49, 52, 147 Epistle to Augusta, 52 Epitaph on a Friend, 41 Francesca of Rimini, 33, 35 Fugitive Pieces, 31 Giaour, The, 32, 45 Heaven and Earth, 35, 37, 47, 48 Hours of Idleness, 31, 33 40, 147 I would I were a careless child, 40, 41 Island, The, 38, 45, 46, 52 'Isles of Greece,' 54536

Index of Names

Byron, George Gordon, 6th lord (continued) Lachin y Gair, 40 Lament of Tasso, The, 33, 50 Lara, 45 Letter to John Murray Esq. on... Bowles's Strictures on the Life...of Pope, 35 Manfred, 34, 35, 41, 47, 48, 60 Marino Faliero, 35, 47, 49 Mazeppa, 34, 45, 46 Memoirs, 34, 103 Oscar of Alva, 40 Parisina, 45, 46 Prisoner of Chillon, The, 34, 45, 46 Prophecy of Dante, The, 33, 35, 50, 56 Romance, To, 41 Sardanapalus, 33 if., 47 ff. Siege of Corinth, The, 32, 45 Some Observations, 36 Sonnet on Chillon, 46 Trans. of Pulci's Morgante Maggiore, 35, 37 Two Foscari, The, 35, 47, 49 Venetian tragedies, 48, 49 Vision of Judgment, The, 36, 37, 53 Werner, 37, 47, 50 When I roved a young Highlander, 40 When we two parted, 51 Conversations of (Medwin's), 37 Life and Works of (ed. Moore), 53 Byron, lady (Anne Isabella Milbanke), 32 - 'Mad Jack,' 31 William, 5th lord, 31 Bywater, Ingram (1840-1914), 334, 481, 482 Byzantine empire, 315 Cadell, Thomas, 234 Caedmon, 344 Caerleon, 346 Caesar, Julius, in Byron's The Deformed Transformed, 50 Caesars, the, 182 Cain, in Byron's drama, 45, 48 Caird, John (1820-1898), 465 Calantha, in Ford's Broken Heart, 190 Calcutta, 138; Sanskrit college, 343 Caliban, 128 Callimachus, 329 Calne, Wiltshire, 191 Calvinism, 279, 284 Cambridge, 132, 198, 200, 256, 273, 294, 296, 298, 305, 306, 325, 327 ff., 338 ff., 342, 354, 357, 369, 370 Christ's college, 344 Clark lectureship, 331 Corpus Christi college, 344, 363 Disney professorship of archaeology, 331 Emmanuel college, 187, 326, 333 Gonville and Caius college, 187,333,341 Jesus college, 326 King's college, 333 Pembroke college, 327 Peterhouse, 330 Professorship of Anglo-Saxon, 344 Chinese, 343 Latin, 335

Professorship of Sanskrit, 343 Regius professorship of Greek, 323, 328 ff., 332 St John's college, 280, 326, 328, 329, 331, 335 if., 341, 345 Trinity college, 31, 288, 302, 308, 323, 328 ff., 335, 344, 347, 353, 369 University library, 323, 341, 342, 369 - press, 324, 328, 329 Cambridge Essays, 324 Camden society, 353, 354, 368, 369 W illiam, Britannia, 345, 353 Cameiros, necropolis of, 339 Cameronians, the, 18, 25 Campagna, the, 69 Campbell, John McLeod (1800-1872), 283, 289, 465; The Nature of the Atonement, 284 - Lewis (1830-1908), 220, 482 Thomas (1777-1844), 95, 96, 98 ff. (main entry), 102, 126, 138, 139, 148, 409 Argyllshire, Lines on Revisiting a Scene in, 99 Battle of the Baltic, The, 99 Gertrude of Wyoming, 100 Hohenlinden, 99, 101 How delicious is the winning, 99 Last Man, The, 99, 161 Lectures on Poetry, 161 Lochiel's Warning, 98, 99 Lord Ullin's Daughter, 98, 99 Pilgrim of Glencoe, The, 100 Pleasures of Hope, The, 41, 100 Soldier's Dream, The, 99 Song of Hybrias the Cretan, The, 99 Specimens, 99, 100 Theodoric, 100 Withdraw not yet those lips and fingers, 99 Ye Mariners of England, 99 Candlish, Robert Smith (1806-1873), 471 Canning, George, 120, 136, 150, 155 Canterbury, 320, 340, 364 Capell, Edward, 369 Capodistrias, Joannes Antonios, count, 314 Caracalla, baths of, 67 Caracona, in Casti's II Poema Tartaro, 55 Carbonari movement, 33, 36, 38, 51 Carey, William (1761-1834), 343, 502 Carleton, George, Military Memoirs, 16 Carlton house, 232 Carlyle, J. A., 137 Thomas, 23 ff.. 97, 159, 162, 177, 178, 219, 253, 273, 283, 430, 431; Sartor Resartus, 163 Caroline divines, 253, 255, 261, 262, 265, 277 poets, 127, 221 Caroline, queen, 19 Carthage, 301, 316 Cary, Henry Francis (1772-1844), 137, 415; Dante, 85, 202 Sir Robert, Memoirs, 16 Casa Magni, 76 Cassano library 366Index o0 Cassels, Walter Richard (1826-1907), 465 Cassiodorus, Flavius Magnus Aurelius, 272, 322 Casti, Giambattista, 33, 51, 52, 56; II Poema Tartaro, 55 Castillo, John (1792-1845), 415 Castlereagh, Robert Stewart, viscount, 69 Caswall, Edward (1814-1878), 455 Catherine II, empress of Russia, 52, 55 Cattuna, empress, in Casti's II Poema Tartaro, 55 Catullus, 337 Caucasus, the, 65, 70 Caxton society, 355 Cecil, Richard (1748-1810), 471 Celtic language, 327, 343, 344, 361, 362 - society, 361 Cenci palace, 70 Beatrice, in Shelley's The Cenci, 67 ff., 113 count, in Shelley's The Cenci, 68 Cephalonia, island of, 38 Cervantes, Miguel de, 168 Chalcedon, 262 ' Chaldee MS. the,' 156, 157, 160, 163 Chalk farm, 161 Chalmers, George (1742-1825), 508; Caledonia, 350; 'Political Annals of the Colonies,' 350; 'Treaties,' 350 - Thomas (1780-1847), 472 Chambers, Robert (1802-1871), 425, 465 Chambers's Journal, 425 Chamier, Frederick (1796-1870), 251, 448 Champion, The, 171 Chandler, Henry William (1828-1889), 520 Richard (1738-1810), 496; Antiquities of lonia, 338 Chantrey, Sir Francis Legatt, 323 Chapman, George, 191; Homer, 79, 190 Charles the great, emperor, 322 I, king of Great Britain, 253, 260; in Shelley's drama, 75 Charles Edward, prince (the young Pretender), 26 Charterhouse, 288, 329, 332 Chase side, Enfield, 201 Chateaubriand, Fran9ois Auguste, vicomte de, Genie du Christianisme, 254 Chatterton, Thomas, 81, 86; Works, 146 Chaucer, Geoffrey, 54, 98, 120, 168, 177, 344, 354 - society, 355 Chaworth, Mary Ann, 31, 51 Chawton, Hampshire, 236 Cherry, J. L., Life of John Clare, 132 Cheshire, 355 Chester, 329 Chester Rolls, 355 Chetham society, 355 Cheyne, Thomas Kelly (1841-1915), 465 Chichester, 86, 274, 327 Childe Harold, in Byron's poem, 43, 45 Childers, Robert Caesar (1838-1876), 502 China, 188 Chinese language and literature, 342, 343, 362 Chloe, 133

f Names 537 Christian doctrine, 259, 264, 275, 278 ff., 292, 295 ff. - scholarship, 280, 298 socialist, 290 Christian Observer, The, 281 Remembrancer, The, 454 Christianity, 254, 269, 270, 276 ff., 282, 283, 290 ff., 297 ff., 322 Christians, 45, 282, 283, 287, 288, 290, 297, 298 Christie, Jonathan, 161, 163 Richard Copley (1830-1901), 333, 369, 515, 520; Etienne Dolet, 334 Chronica Monasterii de Melsa, 356 Chronicles and Memorials of Great Britain and Ireland, 356 Chrysostom, saint, 266 Church, Richard William (1815-1890), 255, 261, 271 ff. (main entry), 319, 455; The Oxford Movement, 256, 265, 272 Churchyard, Thomas, A myrrour of man, 357 Churton, Edward, Life of Joshua Watson, 256 Cicero, M. Tullius, 230, 326, 338; De Officiis, 332; De Oratore, 337; Orations, 335; Second Philippic, 336; Speeches against Catiline, 337; Life and Letters, 306 Cirencester, Richard of, 366 Clairmont, Allegra, 37 Clara Mary Jane, 37 Clapham sect, the, 281 Clara, Sta., 260 in Scott's Marmion, 11 Clare, Allan, in Lamb's Rosamund Gray, 185, 186 - Elinor, in Lamb's Rosamund Gray, 186 John (1793-1864), 131, 134, 415 The Last of March, 132 Clark, George Thomas (1809-1898), 508; Mediaeval Military Architecture in England, 349 John Willis (1833-1910), 508; The Care of Books, 348 William George (1821-1878), Peloponnesus, 331 Clarke, Adam (1762?-1832), 520 Charles Cowden, 79 - Hyde (b. 1815), 508 J. S., 232 Classical archaeologists, 338 ff., 496 ff. - scholars, 323 ff., 479 ff. Claude Lorraine, 172, 173 Claverhouse. See Dundee, viscount Clay, Mrs, in Jane Austen's Persuasion, 240 Clement, saint, 266, 340 Clerical subscription act, 296 Clerk, Sir John, of Penicuik, 350 Clinton, Henry Fynes (1781-1852), 496; Fasti Hellenici, 310, 339; Fasti Romani, 310, 339 Clio, 136 Clisthenes, 313 Clive, Caroline (1801-1873), 448 Close, Francis (1797-1882), 472538 Index of Close Rolls, 355 Clough, Arthur Hugh, 255, 293 Clutterbuck, Robert (1772-1831), 509 Cnidos, 339 Cnossos, palace of, 339 Cobbett, William, 170, 179 Cobet, Carel Gabriel, 330 Coburg, house of, 232 Cockburn, Henry Thomas Cockburn, lord, 'Scottish Criminal Jurisprudence,' 153 Cockney school of poetry, 157, 160 Cockton, Henry (1807-1853), 448 Codex Galeanus, 325 Colburn, Henry, 161, 200 Colebrooke, Henry Thomas (1765-1837), 502; Essays on Sanskrit literature, 343 Colenso, John William (1814-1883), 296, 297, 314, 465 Coleridge, Hartley (1796-1849), 104, 107-8 (main entry), 124, 127, 415 Homer, 108 Medley, A, 108 Poietes Apoietes, 108 Prayer, 108 Prometheus, 107 Shakespeare, 108 Youth, 108 Coleridge, Sir John Taylor, 153 Samuel Taylor, 39, 48, 57 ff., 77, 78, 93, 95, 101, 107, 120, 147, 158, 159, 166, 169, 170, 175, 176, 178, 180 ff., 187, 188, 191, 196, 197, 201, 203, 205, 211,218, 219, 223, 255, 280, 282-3, 289, 465, 527 Aids to Reflection, 283 Ancient Mariner, The, 71, 108, 110, 113, 124, 133 Biographia Literaria, 157 Christabel, 7, 8, 46, 62, 71, 87, 108 Confessions of an Enquiring Spirit, 282, 283, 288 Kubla Khan, 59, 108 Lyrical Ballads, 40, 42 Poems (Oct. 1797), 184 Poems on Various Subjects, 183 Religious Musings, 183 Coleridge, Sara (1802-1852), 124, 128, 415 Envoy, 127 False Love, too long thou hast delayed, 127 One face alone, 127 Phantasmion, 127 Collier, John Payne (1789-1883), 353, 520 Extracts from the Registers of the Stationers' Company, 368 Notes on Rare English Books, 368 Roxburghe Ballads, The, 368 Shakespeare's Library, 368 Collins, John Churton (1848-1908), 504 - Mr, in Jane Austen's Pride and Prejudice, 234, 238, 240, 243, 245 -- William, 101, 177; Evening, 124 Collinson, John (1757?-1793), 509 Colonna palace, 67 Colvin, Sir Sidney, 219 Comines, Philippe de, Memoires 26

C Names Commons, house of, 307 Comus revelry, 43 Conder, Josiah (1789-1855), 415 Confucian canon, the, 343 Congreve, Richard, 334 William, 168 Conington, John (1825-1869), 334, 337, 482 Connor, Ireland, 361 Conrad, in Byron's Corsair, 46 Constable country, 305 Archibald, 142, 144, 155, 156 - George, 350 Constance, in Scott's Marmion, 10 Constantine the great, emperor of Rome, 305, 321 Constantinople, 273 Conybeare, William John (1815-1857), 293, 472 Cooper, Charles Henry (1808-1866), 515 Annals of Cambridge, 357 Athenae Cantabrigienses, 357 Memoir of Margaret Countess of Richmond and Derby, 357 Memorials of Cambridge, 357 Cooper, Charles Purton (1793-1873), 515; An Account of the Public Records, 354 - William Durrant (1812-1875), 511 Coote, Henry Charles (1815-1885), 515 Cope, Edward Meredith (1818-1873), 331, 482 Copenhagen, 336, 344 Copinger, Walter Arthur (1847-1910), 427, 520; Incunabula Biblica, 369 Copleston, Edward, 284 Coptic language, 362 Cork, city, 159; county, 165 'Corn Law Rhymer,' 136 Cornhill Magazine, The, 426, 431 Cornwall, 346 Barry. See Procter, Bryan Waller Corpus Historicum, 355 Cossacks, 46 Cotswolds, the, 256, 257, 265 Cotton, Henry (1789-1879), 520 Courtney, William Prideaux (1845-1913), 521; A Register of National Bibliography, 369 Cousin, Victor, History of Modern Philosophy, 371 Covilla, in Landor's Count Julian, 211 Cowell, Edward Byles (1826-1903), 343, 502 Cowley, Abraham, 182 Cowper, William, 132, 177, 231 Cox, Sir George William (1827-1902), 474; History of Greece, 313, 314; Poems Legendary and Historical, 314 Samuel (1826-1893), 465 Crabbe, George, 36, 42, 95, 136, 231, 232, 268 Cradock, Mrs Harriet, Hulse House, 247 Craik, George Lillie (1798-1866), 504 Cramer, John Anthony (1793-1848), 496 Craven scholar, 323 Crawford, James Ludovic Lindsay, earl of (1847-1914), 521Index of Crawford, Henry, in Jane Austen's Mansfield Park, 239 Miss, in Jane Austen's Mansfield Park, 238 Creighton, Mandell, 271 Crete, 339 Crichton castle, in Scott's Marmion, 10 Crimean war, the, 154, 227 Crito Cantabrigiensis, A Vindication of the Literary Character of Prof. Porson, 325 Croker, John Wilson (1780-1857), 150, 154, 155, 162, 163, 363, 429 Thomas Crofton (1798-1854), 353, 516 Fairy Legends and Traditions, 360 Legends of the Lakes, 360 Popular Songs, 360 Researches in the South of Ireland, 360 Croly, George (1780-1860), 416, 448; Marston, 249; Salathiel, 249 Cross, Mary Ann (George Eliot), 154, 292 Crowe, Catherine (1800?-1876), 448; Adventures of Susan Hopley, 249; Night Side of Nature, The, 248; Story of Lilly Dawson, The, 249 William (1745-1829), 416 Cumberland, 17 Cumming, Joseph George (1812-1868), 509 Cunningham, Sir Alexander (1814-1893), 352, 509 Ancient Geography of India, 353 Architecture of the Temples of Kashmir, 353 Bhilsa Topes, The, 353 Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum, 353 Cunningham, Allan, Biographical and Critical History of British Literature, 365 Cupid, 90 Cureton, William (1808-1864), 341, 503 Curie, James, 509 Curtius, Ernst, 322 George, Principles of Greek Etymology, 337; The Greek Verb, 337 Cussans, John Edwin (1837-1899), 509 Cuthbert, saint, 10 Cybele, in Keats's Endymion, 82 Cyprian, saint, 266 Cyrene, 339 Cythna, in Shelley's Revolt of Islam, 61 Dale, Robert William (1829-1895), 465 Dalgairns, John Dobree (1818-1876), 275, 456 Dalgetty, Dugald, in Scott's Legend of Montrose, 21, 25, 29 Dalkeith, countess of, 7 Dalyell, Sir John Graham (1775-1851), 516; The Darker Superstitions of Scotland, 350 Dante Alighieri, 50, 58, 137, 221, 222, 229, 272 Commedia, 51, 85 Inferno, 202 Paradiso, 76 Vita Nuova, 73

Names 539 5 3 9 Darcy, in Jane Austen's Pride and Prejudice, 237, 238, 243, 247 Darley, George (1795-1846), 107, 114-15 (main entry), 139, 201, 416 Becket, 114 Enchanted Lyre, The, 115 Errors of Ecstacie, 114 Ethelstan, 114 It is not Beauty I demand, 115 I've been roaming, 115 Labours of Idleness, 114 Maiden's Grave, The, 115 Nepenthe, 114, 119 Sylvia, 114, 115 Darling, James (1797-1862), 521 Darwin, Charles, 247 Darwinism, 154, 269 Dashwood, Elinor, in Jane Austen's Sense and Sensibility, 237, 241, 243 John, in Jane Austen's Sense and Sensibility, 237 Marianne, in Jane Austen's Sense and Sensibility, 235. 237, 241 Mrs, in Jane Austen's Sense and Sensibility, 237 Davidson, Andrew Bruce (1831-1902), 341, 501 - James (d. 1866), 519 John, 113 Samuel (1806-1898), 466 Davis, Sir John Francis (1795-1890), 500 Nathan (1812-1882), 316, 475 Davison, John (1777-1834), 466 Dawes, Richard, 325 Dawson, George (1821-1876), 472 Deans, David, in Scott's Heart of Midlothian, 25 Jeanie, in Scott's Heart of Midlothian, 18, 25 Deeside, 31 Defoe, Daniel, 175, 201, 231, 250; Robinson Crusoe, 251 De Flores, in Middleton's Changeling, 222 De Lisle, Ambrose Lisle March Phillipps (1809-1878), 276 Della Cruscan poets, 124 Deloraine, in Scott's Lay of the Last Minstrel, 46 Demogorgon, in Shelley's Prometheus Unbound, 67 De Morgan, Augustus(1806-1871),370,521 Demosthenes, 329, 332; De Falsa Legatione, 330 Denison, John Evelyn, Speaker, 307 Denman, Thomas Denman, lord, 'Parliament and the Courts,' 153 Denmark, 351 De Quincey, Thomas (1785-1859), 159, 160, 164, 174, 178, 203 ff., 219, 223, 224 ff. (main entry), 249, 430, 444 Autobiography, 204 Confessions of an English Opium Eater, 160, 194, 215, 224 Miscellanea, 206 On Murder as one of the Fine Arts, 175, 225 Our Ladies of Sorrow, 226540

Index of Names

Derby, Edward G. G. S. Stanley, 14th earl of (1799-1869), 334 Derbyshire, 230 De Ros, lord, 509 'De Sawdust, Thomas' (De Quincey), 225 De Vere, Sir Aubrey (1788-1846), 416 Aubrey Thomas (1814-1902), 456 Devonshire, 132, 345, 346 William G. S. Cavendish, 6th duke of, 368 Dibdin, Thomas Frognall (1776-1847), 350, 362, 521 Aedes Althorpianae, 366 Bibliographical Decameron, The, 367 Bibliographical Tour, A, 367 Bibliomania, 365, 366 Bibliophobia, 367 Bibliotheca Spenceriana, 366 Introduction to the Greek and Latin Classics, 366, 367 Library Companion, The, 367 Reminiscences of a Literary Life, 367 Dickens, Charles, 25, 219 ff., 250 ff., 431; The Pickwick Papers, 119; Sketches by Boz, 221; The Uncommercial Traveller, 119 Dickson, Robert, 521 William Purdie (1823-1901), 371, 521 Dictionary of National Biography, 307, 309 Dies Irae, 9 Digby, Kenelm Henry (1800-1880), 448 Dinmont, Dandie, in Scott's Guy Mannering, 17, 25 Diodati, villa, 60 Diodorus Siculus, Bibliothecae Historicae, 49 Disraeli, Benjamin. See Beaconsfield, earl of D'Israeli, Isaac (1766-1848), 366, 367, 521 Amenities of Literature, 364 Calamities of Authors, 364 Curiosities of Literature, 353, 364 Literary Miscellanies, 370 Quarrels of Authors, 364 Dobell, Sydney Thompson (1824-1874), Balder, 114 Dobree, Peter Paul (1782-1825), 325, 327, 328, 482; Adversaria, 328; Lexicon rhetoricum Cantabrigiense, 328; Notes on Inscriptions, 328 Dodona, site of, 329 Dodsworth, Roger, 349 Dodwell, Edward (1767-1832), 496; Classical and Topographical Tour through Greece, 338 Dolben, Digby Mackworth, 271, 276, 456 Donaldson, John William (1811-1861), 482 Classical Scholarship and Classical Learning, 331 New Cratylus, The, 330 Theatre of the Greeks, The, 330 Varronianus, 330 Donatists, the, 260 Donne, John, 259

Donne, William Bodham (1807-1882), 475; Essays on the Drama, 305 Dorchester, 326 Dorothea, in Massinger's Virgin Martir, 68 Dorset, 346 Douglas, James, 363 lady Juliana, in Susan Ferrier's Marriage, 245, 246 Down, Ireland, 361 Dowson, John (1820-1881), 516 Driver, Samuel Rolles (1846-1914), 466, 501; Introduction to the Literature of the Old Testament, 341 Dromore, Ireland, 354, 361 Drummond, Henry (1851-1897), 466 Dryden, John, 41. 88, 108, 136, 177, 207, 221, 224, 253; Fables, 46; Works, 16 Dublin, 285, 351, 361; Record office, 360, 361; Trinity college, 159, 338, 342, 360, 362 archbishopric of, 272 Dublin Review, The, 260, 426 Duff, Sir Mountstuart Grant, 147 Dugdale, Sir William, Monasticon Anglicanum, 346, 349 Dumas, Alexandre, pere, 212 Dumfriesshire, 350 Dunbar, William, 95 Duncumb, John (1765-1839), 509 Dundee, 350 John Graham of Claverhouse, viscount, 21 Dunraven, E. R. W. Wyndham-Quin, 3rd earl of (1812-1871), 509 Durham, 10, 327, 340, 348, 354 Dwerga, in Darley's Becket, 114 Dyce, Alexander, 353 Dyer, George (1755-1841), 183, 186, 187, 196, 198 Earle, John (1824-1903), 504 Early English Text society, 344, 355 Earwaker, John Parsons (1847-1895), 509 East Ruston, Norfolk, 323 Easy, Mr, in Marryat's Mr Midshipman Easy, 250 Eaton, J. R. T., 334 Eccles division of Lancashire, 337 Edgeworth, Maria, 2, 241, 245 Edinburgh, 2, 5, 11, 18, 19, 23, 143, 155, 156, 158, 159, 321, 349, 370 Advocates' library, 26, 358, 370 ff. Canongate, 2 Cowgate, 2 George street, 149 High school, 3, 4 Holyrood palace, 29 New college, 371 Register house, 359 Signet library, 358, 371 Tolbooth, 17, 18 University, 332, 335, 350, 359, 372 Edinburgh Annual Register, The, 13 Monthly Magazine, The, 425 Review, The (1755), 142, 426 (1802- ), 32, 33, 92,Index of Names

54I

141 ff. (main entry), 151 ff., 155, 156, 158, 162, 163, 288, 293, 310, 325, 426 Edmond, John Philip (1850-1906), 521 Edmonton, 118, 201 ff. Edward VI, king of England, 355 VII, king of Great Britain, 321 Edwards, Edward (1812-1886), 521; Lives of the Founders of the British Museum, 368; Memoirs of Libraries, 368 Egypt, 198, 317, 320, 339, 340, 351 Exploration fund, 339, 340 Egyptologists, 342 Eldon, John Scott, first earl of, 62 Elena, in Taylor's Philip van Artevelde, 113 Elford, Staffordshire, 277 Elia. See Lamb, Charles Eliot, Anne, in Jane Austen's Persuasion, 240, 242, 243 George. See Cross, Mary Ann Sir Walter, in Jane Austen's Persuasion, 240 Elizabeth, queen of England, 354, 355 Elizabethan age, 80, 93, 168, 169, 358 drama, 68, 69, 112, 186 literature, 107, 113, 116, 253, 262, 364 poets, 47, 58, 79, 81 Ellangowan, laird of. See Bertram, Godfrey Ellen, in Scott's Lady of the Lake, 12 Elleray, lake Windermere, 158 Ellicott, Charles John (1819-1905), 340, 500 Elliot, Sir Walter (1803-1887), 509 Elliott, Charlotte (1789-1871), 416 - Ebenezer (1781-1849), 135, 416; Battle Song, 136 Ellis, Alexander John (1814-1890), 504 -- George, 144, 149 ff., 357; Early English Poets, 146; Specimens of Early English Metrical Romances, 368 - Sir Henry (1777-1869), 509: Introduction to Domesday Book, 346; Original Letters, illustrative of English History, 346 - Robert (1820-1885), 496 Robinson (1834-1913), 483; Appendix Vergiliana, 337; Catullus (trans.), 337 Elliston, Robert William, 189 Elmsley, Peter (1773-1825), 327 ff., 333, 483 Elton, Charles Isaac (1839-1900), 521 Mr, in Jane Austen's Emma, 234, 243 Mrs, in Jane Austen's Emma, 239, 240, 243 Oliver, Survey of English Literature, 1780-1830, 230 Elwin, Whitwell (1816-1900), 153, 429 Ely, 305, 325 Emma, in Jane Austen's novel, 239, 243 Encyclopaedia Britannica, 296, 370 Endowed schools commission, 336 Endymion, in Keats's poem, 57, 81, 82 Enfield, 79, 182, 186, 200, 201 Engel, Carl (1818-1882), 521

England, church of, 254, 259 ff., 266, 267, 274 ff., 295 England, The Political History of, 322 England's Parnassus, 113 Englefield, Sir Henry C. (1752-1822), 509 English dialect society, 344 English, Old, history and literature, 344 Enoch, in Byron's Cain, 48 Epaminondas, 313 Epictetus, Manual, 335 Epicurus, 340 Erasmus, Desiderius, 324, 332 Erastianism, 256 Erskine, Henry, 149 Thomas Erskine, lord, 149 Thomas, of Linlathen (1788-1870), 283, 466; Letters, 284; The Brazen Serpent, 289; The Unconditional Freeness of the Gospel, 284 - William, lord Kinneder, 13 Essays and Reviews, 285, 294 ff., 466 Essex, 305 Este, Italy, 63 -- Leonora de, 50 Eton college, 58, 323, 324 Ettrick shepherd, the. See Hogg, James Etymologicum Magnum, 328 Eucharist, the, 299 Euganean hills, 63 Euphorion, in Goethe's Faust, 34 Euripides, 68, 325, 330 ff. Alcestis, 329 Bacchae, 318, 327, 338 Hecuba, 324, 326 Heraclidae, 327 Hippolytus, 329 Medea, 101, 324, 327 Iphigenia, 329 Orestes, 324 Phoenissae, 324 Evans, Sir Arthur, 316, 339 Sir John (1823-1908), 509; Ancient Bronze Implements, 347; Ancient Stone Implements, 347; Coins of the Ancient Britons, 347 Thomas Saunders (1816-1889), 483 Eve, in Paradise Lost, 85 Eveleigh, John, 284 Ewald, Georg Heinrich August von, 321 Ewart, Nanty, in Scott's Redgauntlet, 21 Ewing, Alexander (1814-1873), 466 Examiner, The, 157, 171, 172, 193, 194 'Exodus, Desert of the,' the, 342 Eyton, Robert William (1815-1881), 509 Ezra, fourth book of, 341 Faber, Frederick William (1814-1863), 259, 275, 456 Fairfax, Jane, in Jane Austen's Emma, 240 Fairholt, Frederick William (1814-1866), 509 Falstaff, Sir John, in Shakespeare's plays, 196, 280, 349 Family Library, The, 318 Fanshawe, Catherine Maria (1765-1834), 416542 Index o Farmer, Richard, 365 Farrar, Frederic William (1831-1903), 466 Farren, Robert, 357 Fathers, the, 269, 277, 298, 355 Fathers of the Holy Catholic Church, 259 Faust, in Goethe's drama, 34, 47 Faversham, Kent, 347 Fellowes, Robert (1771-1847), 466 Fellows, Sir Charles (1799-1860), 339, 476 Fenelon, Aventures de Telemaque, 190 Fenton, Richard (1746-1821), 509 Fenwick, John, 188 Ferdinand, in Shakespeare's Tempest, 54 Ferguson, John, 519; Bibliotheca Chemica, 371; Some Aspects of Bibliography, 371; Witchcraft Literature of Scotland, 371 lady, 360 Sir Samuel (1810-1886), 516; Ogham Inscriptions, 360 Fergusson, James (1808-1886), 510 Cave Temples of India, 353 Illustrated Hand-book of Architecture, 353 Rock-cut Temples of India, 353 Tree and Serpent Worship, 353 Ferrara, 50 Ferrars, Edward, in Jane Austen's Sense and Sensibility, 237, 239, 241 Ferriar, John (1761-1815), Bibliomania, 366; Illustrations of Sterne, 366 Ferrier, James Frederick, 160 Susan Edmonstone (1782-1854), 246, 449; Destiny, 245; Inheritance, The, 245; Marriage, 245 Field, Barron (1786-1846), 182, 199; First Fruits of Australian Poetry, 194; Kangaroo, The, 195 Elizabeth. See Lamb, Mrs Elizabeth - rederick (1801-1885), 341, 501 - Mrs, Charles Lamb's grandmother, 182 Fielding, Henry, 2, 168, 177, 231, 242, 251; Joseph Andrews, 235 Finlay, George (1799-1875), 475 Greece under the Romans, 314 History of Greece, 314, 315 History of the Byzantine and Greek Empires, 314 History of the Greek Revolution, 314 Finlayson, James (1840-1906), 521 Fishwick, Henry (1835-1914), 519 FitzGerald, Edward, 135, 199, 305 Fitztraver, in Scott's Lay of the Last Minstrel, 9 Flanders, 43 Flaxman, John, 172 Fleming, Mary, 27 Fletcher, John, 89, 186; Thierry and Theodoret, 190 Phineas, 79 Flodden, 10, 11 Flora, 80 Florence, 204, 324, 327 Florinda, daughter of count Julian, 211 Fonthill abbey, 345

f Names

Forbes, Alexander Penrose (1817-1875), 456 Edward (1815-1854), 339, 498 Forbes, William Henry (1851-1914), 483 Forcellini, Egidio, 335 Ford, John, The Broken Heart, 190 Fordyce, William, 510 Forster, John, 206, 211, 230, 303 Fortescue, George Knottesford (1847 -1912), 521 Forth, firth of, 11 Fortnightly Review, The, 296 Fosbrooke, Thomas Dudley (1770-1842), 510 Foscari, in Byron's The Two Foscari, 49 Foster, John (1770-1843), 286, 466; On the Aversion of Men of Taste to Evangelical Religion, 281 Foulis, R. and A., 324 Fowler, William (1761-1832), 510 Fox, Charles James, 151, 326 George, 198 William Johnson (1786-1864), 466 France, 26, 27, 30, 31, 43, 59, 174, 254, 276, 282, 343, 367 Frankenstein, in Mary Shelley's novel, 248 Franklin, Benjamin, 165 Franks, Sir Augustus Wollaston (1826 -1897), 347, 510 Fraser's Magazine, 159, 163, 427, 431 Frederica, in Jane Austen's Lady Susan, 233 Freeman, Edward Augustus (1823-1892), 261, 271, 321, 475 Historical Essays, 308, 316 History of Federal Government, 315 History of Sicily, 316 History of the Norman Conquest, 316 History of Wells Cathedral, 348 Poems Legendary and Historical, 314 French, the, 326 historical school, 271 language and literature, 3, 154, 208, 247, 254, 308, 328 law, 354 - national assembly, 144 oratory, 268 pietism, 262 poetry, 4, 354 revolution, 39, 107, 149, 164, 249, 279, 310 theology, 254 Frend, William (1757-1841), 279,466,467 Frere, John Hookham, The Monks and the Giants, 52 Freund, Wilhelm, 335 Froissart, Jean, Chronicles, 146 Froude, James Anthony (1818-1894), 179, 254, 255, 292, 319, 430, 456 -- Richard Hurrell (1803-1836),257 ff., 454 ff.; Remains, 258, 259 Fry, Francis (1803-1886), 521 Fuess, C. M., Lord Byron as a Satirist in Verse, 55 Furneaux, Henry (1829-1900), 483 Furnivall, Frederick James (1825-1910), 504Index of Names

543

Gaelic language, 24 Gairdner, James (1828-1912), 356 Gaisford, Thomas (1779-1855), 327, 328, 333, 483, 484 Gale, Roger, 350 Gait, John (1779-1839), 30, 449 The Annals of the Parish, 251 The Ayrshire Legatees, 251 The Entail, 251 The Last of the Lairds, 251 Gamba family, the, 36, 37 count Pietro, 35, 36, 38 Gardiner and Mullinger, Introduction to the Study of English History, 356 Garnett, Richard (1835-1906), 159, 248, 521 Garrick, David, 180, 200 Gaussen, Frangois S. R. L., 283 Gay, John, 122 Geddes, Alexander (1737-1802), 467 -- Sir William Duguid (1828-1900), 335, 484 Gell, Sir William (1777-1836), 407; Pompeiana, 338 Gelon, Sicilian ruler, 316 Geneva, lake of, 44 Genoa, villa Saluzzo, 37 Gentiles, the, 209 Gentleman's Magazine, The, 140, 181, 193, 345, 347, 365, 428 Geological society, 347 George III, 36, 53 IV, 36, 70 Georgian poets, 106 Geraldine, in Coleridge's Christabel, 88 German ballads, 5 - drama, 372 historical school, 271 language and literature, 113, 154, 157, 221, 247, 254, 288, 302, 308, 340 philosophy, 270 - poetry, 4 theology, 254, 318 Germany, 34, 174, 263, 280, 282, 315, 343, 365, 367 Gessner, Salomon, Der Tod Abels, 48 Ghent, 365 Gibb, Elias John Wilkinson (1857-1901), 503; History of Ottoman Poetry, 342 Gibbon, Edward, 300, 305, 319; Decline and Fall, 318, 322, 324 Gifford lectures, 333 Edwin Hamilton (1820-1905), 484 William, 142, 150 ff., 170, 175, 193, 429; The Baviad, 41; The Maeviad, 41 Gilbert, Sir John Thomas (1829-1898), 515; Celtic Records and Historic Literature of Ireland, 361; Facsimiles of the National Manuscripts of Ireland, 361; Historic and Municipal Documents of Ireland, 361 - William (1760?-1825?), 416 Gilfillan, George, 431 Gilpin Horner, border legend, 7, 8 Gilston, 182 Ginevra, in Rogers's Italy, 98 Ginsburg, Christian David (1831-1914),

501; Facsimiles of MSS. of the Hebrew Bible, 341 Giovanna of Naples, 212 Gisborne, Thomas (1758-1846), 472 Gladstone, William Ewart (1809-1898), 152, 155, 255, 312, 426, 484; Homeric Synchronism, 334; Juventus Mundi, 334; Studies on Homer, 334 Glascock, William Nugent (1787?-1847), 251, 449 Glasgow, 17, 29, 350, 358,370; university, 143, 157, 158, 165, 330, 332, 371 Glaucus, in Keats's Endymion, 82 Gleig, George Robert (1796-1888), 303,449 Glen, William (1789-1826), 416 Gliddon, George Robins (1809-1857), 500 Glossin, in Scott's Guy Mannering, 21 Gloucester, 329, 340 Gloucestershire, 346 Glover, Arnold, 167 Stephen (d. 1869), 507 Godwin, Mary Jane, 189, 191 - Mary, born Wollstonecraft, 61, 191 Mary Wollstonecraft. See Shelley, Mrs W illiam, 39, 59, 60, 64, 65, 67, 73, 93, 188, 190, 248; Life of Chaucer, 146 Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von, 7, 38, 42, 64, 157, 168, 254; Faust, 34, 47, 48, 86; Goetz von Berlichingen, 4 Goldsmith, Oliver, 43, 97, 132; The Traveller, 42 Goode, William (1801-1868), 472 Gorboduc, 190 Gordon, Ada, 32 Catherine, of Gight, 31 Gooch, G. P., History and Historians, 313 Goodwin, Charles Wycliffe (1817-1878), 294 Gore, Catherine Grace Frances (1799 -1861), 449; Mothers and Daughters, 246; Mrs Armytage, or Female Domination, 246 Gosse, Edmund, 115, 173 Gothic language, 326, 327, 343 rule in Italy, 322 Gough, Richard (1735-1809), 510; Anecdotes of British Topography, 344, 345; 'History of the Society of Antiquaries,' 345; Sepulchral Monuments of Great Britain, 345 Graeci, Poetae Minores, 328 Grampians, the, 31 Grandison, Sir Charles, in Richardson's novel, 128 Grant, Sir Alexander (1826-1884), 334, 484 Sir Robert (1779-1838), 417 Granville, Augustus Bozzi, Travels in Russia, 302 Grasmere, 337 Graves, Alfred Perceval, 361 - Charles (1812-1899), 516 -- James (1815-1886), 510 Gray, Rosamund, in Lamb's Rosamund Gray, 186 - Thomas, 133, 177, 208; Elegy, 41544 Index c Great North road, the, 19 Greece, 32, 38 ff., 44, 46, 56, 62, 82, 89, 90, 93, 209, 272, 302, 304, 314 ff., 329 ff., 338, 339; history of, 300, 302, 307 ff. Greek architecture, 339 coins, 338 drama, 68, 113, 327 --- hymns, 273 --- inscriptions, 339 -language and literature, 40, 60, 83, 89, 94, 208 ff., 212, 215, 230, 278, 308, 317, 323 ff., 329, 330, 334, 338, 340, 343 manuscripts, 323 - mythology, 65, 111 - poetry, 58, 329, 330, 332, 333 - revolution, 314 - war of liberation, 38, 75 Greeks, the, 38, 45, 69, 80 Green, John Richard, 321 Thomas Hill (1836-1882), 298, 467 William Charles (1832-1914), 484 Greenwell, William (b. 1820), 354, 510; British Barrows, 348; The electrum coinage of Cyzicus, 348 Greg, William Rathbone (1809-1881), 291, 467 Gregory, saint, 266 Grenville library, 368 Greswell, William Parr (1765-1854), 522 Greta hall, 188 Greville, Mrs, Prayer for Indifference, 124 Griffith, Ralph Thomas Hotchkin (1826 -1906), 502 Grimm, Jacob, 344 Grose, Francis (1731?-1791), 510 Ancient Armour and Weapons, 349 Antiquities of England and Wales, 349 Antiquities of Ireland, 349 Antiquities of Scotland, 349 Grote, George (1794-1871), 307 ff, 318, 322, 475, 476 Essentials of Parliamentary Reform, 310 History of Greece, 311, 312 Plato and the Companions of Sokrates, 311 Seven Letters on the Recent Politics of Switzerland, 311 Statement of the Question of Parliamentary Reform, 310 Grote, Harriet, Personal Life of George Grote, 309 Grub street, 204 George (1812-1892), 513 Guardian, The, 454 Guernsey, 328 Guest, Edwin (1800-1880), 510 Giuccioli, count, 34 Theresa, countess, 33 ff., 37, 49, 50 Guido Reni, 67 Guilsborough, 256 Guizot, Fran9ois P. G., 304 Gulnare, in Byron's Corsair, 46 Gutch, Matthew, 187 Guthrie, Thomas (1803-1873), 472 Hackney academy, 166 Hades, in Byron's Cain, 48

/f Names

Hadleigh, Suffolk, 256, 257 Haidee, in Byron's Don Juan, 46, 54 Haigh, Arthur Elam (1855-1905), 484 Hain, Ludwig, Repertorium Bibliographicum, 369 Hakluyt society, 355 Hales, John Wesley (1836-1914), 504 Haliburton, Thomas Chandler (1796-1865), 449 Halicarnassus, mausoleum of, 339 Halkett, Samuel (1814-1871), 522; Dictionary of Anonymous...Literature, 371 Hall, Anthony, 7 Robert (1764-1831), 472 - Theophilus D., 335 - William (1748-1825), 417 Hallam, Henry, 144, 311 Halliwell-Phillipps, James Orchard, (1820 -1889) 353, 369, 522; Dictionary of Archaic and Provincial Words, 369; Dictionary of Old English Plays, 369 Hamburg, 4 Hamilton, Alexander (1762-1824), 343 - Alexander, 144 - Janet (1795-1873), 417 -Thomas (1789-1842), 449 -Sir William (1788-1856), 158; DiscussionsonPhilosophy and Literature, 370; Lectures on Logic and Metaphysics, 370 Hamlet, Shakespeare's, 196 Hampden, Renn Dickson (1793-1868), 286 ff., 259, 467 Hampshire, 231, 236, 346 Hampstead, 79, 89, 91 Hardy, Sir Thomas Duffus (1804-1878), 516; Descriptive catalogue of materials relating to the history of Great Britain and Ireland, 355 Hare, Augustus William (1792-1834), 467; Guesses at Truth, 301 Julius Charles (1795-1855), 282, 289, 308, 467; Guesses at Truth, 301; The Mission of the Comforter, 288; Vindication of Niebuhr's History, 302 Hargrove, William (1788-1862), 510 Harleian library, 363 -- society, 355 Harris, Furlong Elizabeth Skipton, 456 -- Thomas, 69 Harrison, William (1802-1884), 519 Harrow school, 31, 41, 326, 329, 333 Hartley, David, 168 Hartshorne, Charles Henry (1802-1865), 369, 522 Harwood, Edward (1729-1794), 522 Haslewood, Joseph (1769-1833), 516 Hasted, Edward (1732-1812), 510 Hastings, Warren, 343 Hatch, Edwin (1835-1889), 467 Hatcher, Henry (1777-1846), 510 Hatteraick, Dirk, in Scott's Guy Mannering, 21 Hatton, Warwickshire, 326 Hawker, Robert Stephen (1803-1875), 417 'And shall Trelawney die?' 134 Morwenna poems, 134Index of Names

545

Pater Vester Pascit illa, 134 Queen Gwennyvar's Round ('Naiad for Grecian Waters'), 134 Quest of the Sangraal, The, 134 Sea Bird's Cry, The, 134 Silent Tower of Bottreau, The (Bells of Bottreaux), 134 Song of the Western Men, 134 Haydon, Benjamin Robert, 79, 81, 172, 173 Hayman, Henry (1823-1904), 484 Hazlitt, John, 166 - Margaret, 165 - Mrs (Mrs Bridgewater), 167 - Sarah (born Stoddart), 167, 188 William, unitarian minister, 165 - William (1778-1830), 77, 79, 104, 108, 118, 160, 164 ff. (main entry), 188, 192, 199, 203, 219, 223, 431 ff. Cant and Hypocrisy, 177 Conversations of James Northcote, 173 Disagreeable People, On, 174 Essay on the Principles of Human Action, 168 Familiar Style, On, 174 Fear of Death, On the, 174 Feeling of Immortality in Youth, The, 174, 176 Fight, The, 174, 175 Genius and Common Sense, 177 Going a Journey, On, 174, 176 Letter to William Gifford, 175 Liber Amoris, 167 My First Acquaintance with Poets, 166, 174, 176 Past and Future, 177 Patronage and Puffing, 177 Persons One Would Wish to have Seen, Of, 174 Reading New Books, On, 174 Reading Old Books, On, 174 Review of the English Stage, A, 171 Sick Chamber, The, 174 Spirit of the Age, The, 170 Taste, On, 174 Thought and Action, 177 Wit and Humour, 177 Writing and Speaking, 177 Hazlitt, William Carew (1834-1913), 522 Hazlitts, the, 192 Head, Barclay Vincent (1844-1914), 497 Headlam, Walter George (1866-1908), 485; A Book of Greek Verse, 333 Headrigg, Cuddie, in Scott's Old Mortality, 25 - Mause, in Scott's Old Mortality, 25 Heath, Benjamin, 365 Heber, Reginald (1783-1826), 365, 417, 467; If thou wert by my side, my love, 139; Morte d'Arthur, 138 - Richard (1773-1833), 5, 365, 366, 522 Hebraists, 262, 341 Hebrew language, 341, 362 Heine, Heinrich, 169 Helen, in Goethe's Faust, 34 - in Shelley's Rosalind and Helen, 62 E. L. XII.

Hellenic studies, society for the promotion of, 340 Hellenism, 34, 40 Helvetius, Claude Adrien, 168 Hemans, Felicia Dorothea (1793-1835), 124 ff., 129, 417 Better Land, The, 127 Casabianca, 125, 127 England's Dead, 127 They grew in beauty side by side, 127 Henley, William Ernest, 167, 179, 225 Henman, Charles, 512 Hennell, Charles Christian (1809-1850), 467 Henrietta, queen, in Shelley's Charles I, 75 Henry, James (1798-1876), Aeneidea, 338 Hephaestion, Manual of Greek Metre, 328 Heraud, John Abraham (1799-1887), 128, 129, 417 'Heraudee, Jawbrahim,' 129 Herbert, William (1718-1795), 522 Herculaneum, 340 'Hercules,' ship, 38 Hereford, 286 Herkomer, Sir Hubert von, 330 Hermann, Johann Gottfried Jakob, 324, 325 Herodas, Mimes, 340 Herodotus, 328, 330, 334 Herrick, Robert, 223 Hertfordshire, 180, 182, 183, 201 Hesiod, 331 Heywood, Thomas, 191 Highlands, the, 19, 24, 26, 83, 84, 255 Hill, Rowland (1744-1833), 472 Hincks, Edward (1792-1866), 342, 499 Hinnom, 82 Hinton, James (1822-1875), 467 Hitopadesa, the, 343 Hoare, Sir Richard Colt (1758-1838), 510; Wiltshire, 346 Hobhouse, John Cam, lord Broughton de Gyfford, 32, 34 Hoblyn, Robert (1710-1756), 522 Hodgkin, Thomas (1831-1913), 476; Italy and her Invaders, 322 Hodgson, John, 16 Hodnet, 365 Hogarth, William, 177, 182, 192 Hogg, James, 5, 95, 96, 156, 159, 160, 449 Thomas Jefferson, 60, 79 Hogsflesh, in Lamb's Mr H-, 189 Holden, Hubert Ashton (1822-1896), 331, 485 Holland, 165 Holmes, Arthur (1837-1875), 485 Holy alliance, the, 39, 40 island, 10 Homer, 99, 256, 310, 311; Iliad, 54, 280, 331, 334; Odyssey, 190, 333, 334 Hone, William, Every-Day Book, 181; Table Book, 200 Hood, Thomas (1799-1845), 107, 108 ff. (main entry), 119 ff., 129, 131, 139, 418 35546

Index of Names

Hood, Thomas (continued) Bridge of Sighs, The, 109, 110 Clapham Academy, 109 Death Bed, A, 110 Desert Born, The, 111 Elm Tree, The, 110 Eugene Aram, 110 Fair Ines, 111 Farewell, Life, 110 Giver of glowing light, 111 Haunted House, The, 110, 111 Hero and Leander, 110 It was not in the Winter, 110 Lake and a Fairy Boat, A, 111 Lycus the Centaur, 110 Miss Kilmansegg, 109, 111 Plea of the Midsummer Fairies, The, 110, 111 Serious Poems, 109 Song of the Shirt, The, 109 Spring it is cheery, 111 Stars are with the Voyager, 111 United Family, The, 121 Up the Rhine, 121 Works, 109 Hook, Theodore Edward (1788-1841), 103, 123, 449; Gervase Skinner, 251; Sayings and Doings, 251 Walter Farquhar (1798-1875), 274, 457 Hooker, Richard, 253 Hoppner, John, 323 Horace, 73, 318, 326, 335, 363; Epistles, 337 Horne, George (1730-1792), 467 - Richard Henry (1803-1884), 107, 117, 418 Cosmo de' Medici, 118 Death of Marlowe, The, 118 Laura Dibalzo, 118 New Spirit of the Age, A, 118 Orion, 118 Horne, Thomas Hartwell (1780-1862), 472, 522 Horner, Francis, 144; 'The Paper credit of Great Britain,' 145 Horsfield, Thomas Walker (d. 1837), 511 Horsham, Sussex, 58 Horsley, Samuel, 279, 280 Hort, Fenton John Anthony (1828-1892), 340, 467; The Way the Truth the Life, 298 Houghton, Richard Monckton Milnes, lord,' The Political State of Prussia,' 153 Household Words, 221 Howard, Edward Granville George (d. 1841), 449 Howson, John Saul (1816-1885), 472 Hoxton, 183 Hucknall Torkard, 39 Huddesford, George (1749-1809), 418 Hiigel, baron von, 275 Hugo, Victor, 208 Hulsean lectures, 298 Hume, Abraham (1814-1884), 511 David, 300; Essay on Miracles, 285

Hunt, James Henry Leigh (1784-1859) 70, 74, 79 ff., 157, 160, 162, 171, 172, 178, 192, 194, 199, 204 ff., 219, 220 ff. (main entry), 227, 442 if. Abou ben Adhem, 222 Captain Sword and Captain Pen, 223 Feast of the Poets, The, 223 Feast of the Violets, The, 223 Glove, The, 223 Hero and Leander, 222 Jenny kissed me, 222 Liberal, The, 36, 37 Man, Fish and Spirit, 222 Old Court Suburb, The, 223 Palfrey, The, 223 Poetical Works, 222 Reflector, The, 223 Story of Rimini, The, 222 Tatler, The, 223 Hunter, Joseph (1783-1861),516; Hallamshire, 346; South Yorkshire, 346 Hunterian club, 358 Hursley, 277 Hurstmonceaux rectory, 288 Hutchins, John (1698-1773), 511 Hutchinson, William (1732-1814), 511 Hutton, Richard Holt (1826-1897), 467 - William (1723-1815), 511 Huxley, Thomas Henry, 297 Hyperides, 331, 340 Hyperion, in Keats's poem, 86 Hyslop, James (1798-1827), 418 Iago, in Shakespeare's Othello, 171 Ibsen, Henrik, 116 Ignatius, saint, 340; Epistles, 341 Illustrations of Northern Antiquities. 358 Imogen, in Shakespeare's Cymbeline, 87 India, 343, 352, 353, 361 Indian alphabets, 352 law, 327 mutiny, the, 227 Indicator, The, 194 Innes, Cosmo (1798-1874), 516; Lectures on Scotch Legal Antiquities, 359 Iona society, 361 Ionian sea, 38 Ipswich, queen Elizabeth's school, 331 Ireland, 165, 337, 344, 351, 360, 361; church of, 272 Ireland, Ancient Laws of, 360, 361 Ireland, William Henry, 364 Irish archaeological society, 361 - archaeology, 351, 352 history and antiquities, 360 language and literature, 360 ff. poets, 114 sees, the, 257 Irving, David (1778-1860), 522; History of Scotish Poetry, 370; Lives of Scotish Poets, 370; Memoirs of... George Buchanan, 370 Edward (1792-1834), 472 Isabel, in The Decameron, 82 Isabella, in Keats's poem, 86, 88 Ismail, siege of, in Byron's Don Juan, 55 Isola, Charles, 200Index oj Isola, Emma. See Moxon, Mrs Israel, 299 Italian art, 33 - language and literature, 3, 52, 83, 137, 202, 308 - medley-poets, 51, 52 novella, 53 oratory, 268 -poetry, 4, 33, 55, 71 theology, 254 Italy, 33 if., 42 ff., 49, 50, 52, 54, 57, 62, 64, 67, 82, 92, 248, 338 Ithaca, 338 Ivernian society, Journal, 351, 360 Jacobean poets, 221 Jacobite rising, 1, 26 James I, king of England, 18, 21; Secret History of, 16 James, George Payne Rainsford (1799 -1860), 250, 449; Richelieu, 249 Montague Rhodes, 516 Jamieson, John (1759-1838), 517 -- Robert (1780?-1844), 358, 517; Popular Ballads and Songs, 357 Janina, in Albania, 43 Janus, 139 Jarvie, Baillie Nicol, in Scott's Rob Roy, 25 Jasher, the lost book of, 331 Jebb, John, bishop of Limerick, 256 Sir Richard Claverhouse (1841 -1905), 324, 485, 486 Attic Orators, The, 332 Bentley, 332 Introduction to Homer, 332 Pindaric Odes, 332 Jefferson, Samuel (1809-1846), 511 Jeffrey, Alexander (1806-1874), 511 - Francis Jeffrey, lord (1773-1850), 8 if., 42, 92, 103, 142 ff., 152, 153, 156, 158, 161, 163, 426; Contributions to the Edinburgh Review, 146; 'Don Cevallos, and the French Usurpation in Spain,' 149 Jennings, Mrs, in Jane Austen's Sense and Sensibility, 236 Jerusalem, 107, 249, 260, 321 Jesus Christ, 40, 65, 67, 256, 259, 273, 284, 287, 290, 295 ff. Jewish church, 321 faith, 14 Jewitt, Llewellyn Frederick William (1816-1888), 511 Jews, the, 318 Joanna, in Middleton's Changeling, 222 Job, 64 Johannes Secundus, 223 Johnson, James, Scots Musical Museum, 14 -- Samuel, 218, 357, 363; Lives of the Poets, 137 Johnston's Edinburgh Magazine, 430 Jones, Sir William, 343, 353, 502; Asiatic Researches, 327 Jonson, Ben, 105, 125, 177, 224 Jortin, John (1698-1770), 468

c Names 547 Jowett, Benjamin (1817-1893), 292ff., 333, 334, 468, 486; The Epistles of St Paul, 293 Joyce, Patrick Weston (1827-1914), 517 Ancient Irish Music, 361 Irish Music and Song, 361 Irish Names of Places, 361 Irish Peasant Songs, 361 Old Celtic Romances, 361 Social History of Ancient Ireland, 361 Juan, don, in Byron's poem, 46, 54, 55 Julian, in Landor's Count Julian, 211 Juliana, lady, in Susan Ferrier's Marriage, 245 Julie, 60 Juliet, in Shakespeare's play, 54 'Jumping Jenny,' the, in Scott's Redgauntlet, 21 Jungfrau, the, 47 Junius, 54 Jupiter, 64, 80; in Shelley's Prometheus Unbound, 65, 66 Kaled, in Byron's Lara, 46 Kapur-di-Giri rock-inscription, 352 Katrine, loch, 11, 12 Kean, Edmund, 171 Keats, George, 84, 90 - Georgiana, 81 John (1795-1821), 40, 57, 58, 79 ff. (main entry), 106, 107, 113, 117, 126, 139, 157, 160, 162, 205, 221, 222, 405 ff. Autumn, To, 72, 81, 89, 91 Bards of Passion and of Mirth, 89 Bright star!, 92 Cap and Bells, The, 88 Endymion, 58, 81 ff., 88, 89 Eve of St Agnes, The, 81, 86 if. Eve of St Mark's, The, 87 Fall of Hyperion, The, 85, 86 Fancy, 89 Fanny, Ode to, 92 Grecian Urn, Ode on a, 58, 72, 90 Homer, To, 92 Hymn to Pan, 82 Hyperion, 74, 84 if., 92, 94, 305 I stood tiptoe, 80 Isabella, 58, 83, 88 June's sea, 92 King Lear, On sitting down to read, once again, 58, 83, 91 La Belle Dame sans Merci, 87, 88, 94 Lamia, 88, 194 Maia, Ode to, 89 Melancholy, Ode on, 90 Mermaid Tavern, Lines on the, 89 Nightingale, Ode to a, 91, 92 0 Sorrow, 82 Otho the Great, 88 Oxford, On, 202 Psyche, Ode to, 89, 90 Robin Hood, 89 Sleep, To, 92 Sleep and Poetry, 80, 81, 85 Spenser, Imitation of, 79 Stephen, 88548 Index 6 Keats, John (continued) Teignmouth, 202 The Day is gone, I cry you mercy, 92 To..., 92 To some ladies, 80 When I have fears, 91 Keble, John (1792-1866); 253 ff., 264 ff. (main entry), 271, 274, 277, 454, 455, 457; The Christian Year, 257, 261, 264 Thomas (1793-1875), 153, 457 Keightley, Thomas (1789-1872), 306,476 Fairy Mythology, 368 History of Greece, 302 History of the War of Greek Independence, 302 Mythology of Ancient Greece and Italy, 302 Outlines of General History, 302 Keith-Falconer, Ion Grant Neville (1856 -1887), 499 Kelly, Fanny, 194 Kelsall, Thomas Forbes, 115 Kelso, 5 Kemble, John Mitchell (1807-1857), Codex Diplomaticus Aevi Saxonici, 344; Horae Ferales, 347; Saxons in England, 344 Kembles, the, 119, 171 Kennedy, Benjamin Hall (1804-1889), 331, 332, 336, 486; Between Whiles, 329; Latin Primer, 329; Public School Latin Grammar, 329 - Charles Rann (1808-1867), 329, 468 John (1789-1833), 419 Rann (1772-1851), 419 Kenrick, John (1788-1877), 511; Ancient Egypt, 348; Phoenicia, 348; Primeval History, 348 Kent, 347 Kenyon, John (1784-1856), 419 Keswick, 84 Key, Thomas Hewitt (1799-1875), 486; Latin Dictionary, 335; Latin Grammar, 335 Kharosthi alphabet, the, 352 Kidd, Thomas (1770-1850), 327, 486 Kilkenny archaeological society, 351 Kinch, Horace, in Dickens's Uncommercial Traveller, 119 King, Charles William (1818-1888), 335, 497 Edward, 74 Richard John (1818-1879), 517 Zoe, 116 Kingsley, Charles (1819-1875), 102, 267, 290, 291, 430, 431, 468 Kinneder, Lord. See Erskine, William Kinsale prison, 165 Kirkby, T., artist, 323 Kitchin, George William (1827-1912), 354, 517; History of France, 348 Kitto, John (1804-1854), 472 Knight, Charles (1791-1873); English Cyclopaedia, 345; Penny Cyclopaedia, 307 - Ellis Cornelia (1757-1837), 450 Knightley, in Jane Austen's Emma, 239

ff Names Knock, Duncan, in Scott's Heart of Midlothian, 19 Knowles, Herbert (1798-1817), 419 Knox, Alexander (1757-1831), 256, 457 Kosciusko, in Campbell's Pleasures of Hope, 100 Kynaston, Herbert (1835-1910), 486 'L.E.L.' See Landon, Laetitia Elizabeth Lacordaire, Jean Baptiste Henri, 254 Laidlaw, William, 5 Laing, David (1793-1878), 358, 372, 517 - John (1809-1880), 371, 522 Laleham, 302 Lamb, Lady Caroline (1785-1828), 450 - Charles (1775-1834), 110, 114, 130, 131, 135, 164, 166, 167, 172 if., 176, 178, 179, 180ff. (main entry), 219, 221 ff., 282, 434 ff. Adventures of Ulysses, The, 189, 190 Album Verses, 202 Blakesmoor in H ---shire, 182 Blank Verse, by Charles Lloyd and Charles Lamb, 184 Confessions of a Drunkard, 193 Convalescent, The, 200 Curious Fragments, 187, 188 Dissertation on Roast Pig, 160 Dream Children, 182, 202 Essays of Elia, 160, 183, 193, 196, 197, 201, 202 First Going to Church, 191 Genius and Character of Hogarth, The, 193 Gipsy's Malison, The, 202 Going or Gone, 202 Hester, 194 Hypochondriacus, 187 In His Own Album, 202 In the Album of Lucy Barton, 202 John Woodvil (Pride's cure), 186 ff., 191, 194 'Lady Blanch,' 187 Last Essays of Elia, 200, 201 Macbeth, in Tales from Shakespear, 189 Mr H, 188, 189, 194 New Year's Eve, 197 Newspapers Thirty-five years ago, 188 Old China, 186 Old Familiar Faces, The, 184, 202 On the Inconveniences Resulting from being Hanged, 193 Othello in Tales from Shakespear, 189 Oxford in the Vacation, 187 Popular Fallacies, 197, 200 Pride's Cure, 186 Prince Dorus, 191 Quaker's Meeting, A, 198 Recollections of Christ's Hospital, 193, 197 Recollections of the South-Sea House, 195 Shakespeare, Tragedies of, 193 Specimens from the Writings of Fuller, 193 Specimens of English Dramatic Poets, 190, 191 Starkey, Captain, 181Index oj Superannuated Man, The, 200 Table-Talk, 193 Tale of Rosamund Gray and Old Blind Margaret, 185, 186, 194 Theses quaedam theologicae, 185 Two Races of Men, The, 198 Witch Aunt, The, 191 Witches and other Night Fears, 191 Works (1818), 194 Lamb, Charles and Mary, Mrs Leicester's School, 182, 191; Poetry for Children, 191; Tales from Shakespear, 188 ff. Mrs Elizabeth (born Field), 180 John, father of Charles Lamb, Poetical Pieces on Several Occasions, 180 - John, brother of Charles Lamb, 181 ff., 195 - Mary Ann (1764-1847), 167, 173, 181 ff. (main entry), 434 ff.; 'Highborn Helen,' 182, 186, 188; Visit to the Cousins, 191; Young Mahometan, The, 182, 191 Sarah, 184 Lambinus, Dionysius, 326 Lamennais, Hugues Felicite Robert de, 254 Lamia, in Keats's poem, 88 Lancashire, 337, 346, 355 Landon, Laetitia Elizabeth, 'L.E.L.' (1802-1838), 124ff., 129, 419, 450; Ethel Churchill, 247 Landor, Robert Eyres (1781-1869), 228 ff. (main entry), 442 Count Arezzi, 228 Earl of Brecon, The, 228 Faith's Fraud, 228 Fawn of Sertorius, The, 228 ff. Ferryman, The, 228 Fountain of Arethusa, The, 229, 230 Impious Feast, The, 229 Landor, Walter Savage ( 1775-1864), 204ff. (main entry), 223, 266 ff., 439 ff. Acts and Scenes, 211 ff., 215 Andrea of Hungary, 212 Browning sonnet, 214 'Cenci' scenes, 213 Citation and Examination of Shakespeare, The, 215, 216, 220 Coresus and Callirrhoe, 212 Count Julian, 209, 211, 212, 214 Dirce, 214 Dream of Boccaccio, 226 Dry Sticks, 214 Duke de Richelieu, Sir Firebrace Cotes, etc., 216 Essex and Spenser, 220 Euthymedes, 217 Gebir, 209 ff., 229 Guidone and Lucia, 214 Gunlaug, 214 Hamadryad, 213 Hellenics, 212, 213 Ianthe poems, 214 Imaginary Conversations, 205, 209, 211, 215, 217, 230 Menelaus and Helen, 212 Miscellanies, 205

f Names 549 Neapolitan trilogy, 211, 212 Pentameron, The, 215 Pericles and Aspasia, 215, 217 Poems, 205, 211, 217 Rose Aylmer, 214, 220 Rose the Third, 215 Sensible Girl's Reply, A, 215 Works, 212 Lane, Edward William (1801-1876), 342, 499 Lang, Andrew (1844-1912), 154, 362, 522 'Bibliomania in France,' 371 Books and Bookmen, 371 'Elzevirs,' 371 Library, The, 371 Lockhart, Life of J. G., 162 Langdale, Henry Bickersteth, lord, 355, 356 Lansdowne, lord, 103 Laon, in Shelley's Revolt of Islam, 61 Lara, in Byron's poem, 46 Lardner, Dionysius (1793-1859) Cabinet Cyclopaedia, 303 Critical Library, 303 Cyclopaedia, 308 Edinburgh Cabinet Library, 303 La Rochefoucauld, Frangois, due de, 97 Latham, Robert Gordon (1812-1888), 504 Latin hymns, 273 language and literature, 40, 106, 134, 208, 223, 230, 265, 278, 308, 317, 326, 327, 330, 335 ff., 343, 354 verse, 58, 265, 305, 329 Lauder, Sir Thomas Dick (1784-1848), 450 Laudian movement, the, 253 Laurentian manuscripts, 324, 327, 328 Law, Thomas Graves (1836-1904), 522; Collected Essays, 371 William, 284; The Serious Call, 282 William John (1787-1869), 497 Lawford, Essex, 305 Lawrence, John Laird Mair Lawrence, lord, 316 Lawrie, Sir Archibald Campbell (1837 -1914), 517; Annals of Malcolm and William, 360; Early Scottish Charters, 360; Index to the Scots Acts, 360 Layamon, Brut, 356 Layard, Sir Austen Henry (1817-1894), 339, 497 Leabhar Breac, the, 362 Leake, William Martin (1777-1860), 497 Numismata Hellenica, 338 Researches in Greece, 338 Topography of Athens, 338 Travels, 338 Lear, in Shakespeare's play, 47 Lee Priory press, 364, 520 Lee, John Edward (1808-1887), 511; Imperial Profiles, 346 Samuel (1783-1852), 341, 501 Sophia and Harriet, Canterbury Tales, 37, 50 - William, 522 Leeds, 274550

Index of Names

Legge, James (1815-1897), 343, 500 Leghorn, 37, 38 Le Grice, Charles Valentine (1773-1858), 419 Leigh, Augusta, 34 Leighton, Robert, 283, 284 Leinster, Book of, 362 Leipzig, 280 Le Keux, John Henry, 357 Le Neve, John, Fasti Ecclesiae Anglicanae, 355 Le Noir, Elizabeth Anne (1755?-1841), 450 Leonardo da Vinci, 187 Leopardi, count Giacomo, 72 Leopold, prince, of Coburg, 232 Lepanto, 38 Lerici, 37 Le Sage, Alain-Rene, 168 Leslie, Forbes, 511 Lewis, David, My Winifreda, 139 - Sir George Cornewall (1806-1863), 301, 310, 311, 498; Astronomy of the Ancients, 339; Credibility of Early Roman History, 305, 339; 'Legislation for the Working Class,' 153 Matthew Gregory ('Monk Lewis'), Tales of Wonder, 5 Lexicon rhetoricum Cantabrigiense, 328 Leyden, John (1775-1811), 5, 419; Scenes of Infancy, 133; The Mermaid, 133 Liber Hymnorum (Irish), 362 Liberal, The, 36, 37 Liberate Rolls, 355 Library of the Fathers, The, 274, 454 Lichfield, 124, 328 Liddell, Henry George (1811-1898), 333, 487 Liddesdale, 4, 19 Liddon, Henry Parry (1829-1890), 254, 273, 457, 458 Lightfoot, Joseph Barber (1828-1889), 298, 340, 468, 501 Lincoln, 180, 329, 330, 340 Lindisfarne, 10 Lindsay, lord, in Scott's Abbot, 27 Linwood, William (1817-1878), 487 Lipscomb, George (1773-1846), 511 Lisobeta, in The Decameron, 82 Lister, ThomasHenry (1800-1842), Granby, 247, 450 Literary Gazette, The, 348 Journal, The, 301 -- Miscellany (Ollier's), 74 Little John, 3 Littlemore, Oxfordshire, 260, 261 Litton, Edward Arthur, 472 Lloyd, Charles (1775-1839), 187, 419, 438; Blank Verse, by Charles Lloyd and Charles Lamb, 184; Edmund Oliver, 185; Nugae Canorae, 194 - Robert, 181, 185, 193 Lochleven castle, 27 Lochnagar, 31 Locker-Lampson, Frederick, 121 Lockhart, John Gibson (1794-1854), 2, 7, 10, 19, 20, 26, 28, 153, 154, 156 ff.,

161 ff., 429; Peter's Letters to his Kinsfolk, 158 Logan, James (1794?-1872), 511; Clans of the Scottish Highlands, 350; The Scottish Gael, 350 Lombardy, 63 London, 18, 31, 32, 37, 38, 57, 81, 142, 150, 164, 166, 167, 169, 172, 181, 203, 232, 234, 290, 291,310, 323, 325, 329, 341, 347, 349 Adelphi theatre, 171 Aquatic theatre, 171 Bow street police court, 128 British museum, 200, 339, 340, 342, 345 ff., 356, 368, 372, 382 Chancery lane, 187 Chapel street, 184 Christ's hospital, 181, 183 Coburg theatre, 171 Colebrook row, 198 Covent garden, 187, 194 -- - theatre, 69, 171 Crown Office row, 181 Drury lane theatre, 35, 171, 189, 194 Dulwich college, 336 East India house, 183, 192, 198, 200 - London theatre, 171 Essex street, 279 Fetter lane, 181 Finsbury pavement, 79 Fleet street, 188, 205 Fulham, 201 Hackney, 184 Haymarket theatre, 171 Highgate, 201 Holborn, 183 India office, 305 Inner Temple, 180, 181, 183 -- lane, 191, 192 Islington, 184, 196, 198, 200, 201 Kensington, 331 King's college, 290 theatre, 171 Lambeth palace library, 367 Leadenhall, 198, 200 street, 183 Lincoln's inn, 354 Little Queen street, 183 London institution, 323 Lyceum theatre, 171 Mermaid tavern, 89 Mitre court buildings, 187 Old Bailey, 279 Paternoster row, 205 Pentonville, 184, 186, 187, 194 Pimlico, 365 Royal institution, 343 Russell street, 194, 198 St Dunstan's church, 191 St Margaret's church, 319 St Paul's cathedral, 271 ff., 319, 320 Skinner street, 191 Southampton buildings, 187, 191 South-Sea house, 183, 195 Spencer house, 356 Strand, 181, 188 Surrey theatre, 171Index of Names

55

Temple, 183, 187, 194 church, 191 University, 350 - college, 297, 309, 335, 336 Wapping, 362 Westminster, 272, 275, 294 abbey, 312, 319, 365 school, 334 London and Westminster Review, The, 430 - Magazine, The, 141, 160-1 (main entry), 171, 193, 195, 199, 200, 428 Review, The, 430 Long, George (1800-1879), 487; Decline of the Roman Republic, The, 307, 335 Longinus, 324 Longman and Rees, publishers, 142 Lords, house of, 32, 285 Lorenzo, in Keats's Isabella, 86; in The Decameron, 82 Loughborough, Alexander Wedderburn, lord. See Rosslyn, earl of Louis XI, king of France, 21, 26 Lovel, in Lamb's Elia, 180 Lowe, Robert W., 522 Lowell, James Russell, 179 Lowndes, William Thomas (d. 1843), 522; The Bibliographer's Manual, 368; The British Librarian, 368 Lowth, Robert (1710-1787), 468 Luard, Henry Richards, 324, 356 Lubbock, Sir John. See Avebury, lord Lucan, 67, 306 Lucca, 62 Lucifer, in Byron's Cain, 48; in Byron's Vision of Judgment, 53 Lucretia, 68 Lucretius, 67, 326, 335 Lugwardine, Antony, in Robert Landor's Fountain of Arethusa, 230 Lushington, Edmund Law (1811-1893), 487; On the Study of Greek, 330 Luther, Martin, 273, 281 Luttrell, Henry (1765?-1851), 419 Lux Mundi, 299 Lycia, 339 Lye, Edward (1694-1767), 344, 504 Lyme Regis, 241 Lymne, 347 Lyndsay, Sir David, 10, 350 Lyra Apostolica, 257, 454 Lysons, Daniel (1762-1834), 511; Magna Britannia. 345; Environs of London, 345 - Samuel(1763-1819), 511; Reliquiae Britannico-Romanae 345 Lyte, Henry Francis (1793-1847), 419 Lytton, Edward G. E. Lytton BulwerLytton, lord, 131 Macalister, R. A. S., 351, 352, 360 Macaulay, George Campbell (1852-1915), 504 -- Thomas Babington Macaulay, lord, 129, 141, 152, 153, 155, 163, 178, 221, 262, 319; Essays, 326; Lays of Ancient Rome, 30; Virginia, 261 Macbeth, lady, in Shakespeare's play, 68, 171

McCaul, John, 511 MacCulloch, John Ramsay (1789-1864), 522 McDow, in Susan Ferrier's Destiny, 245 Macedon, 309 Maclvor, Fergus, in Scott's Waverley, 26 -- lora, in Scott's Waverley, 22 Mackay, Robert William (1803-1882), 468 Mackenzie, Henry, 245 - Sir James Dixon, 511; The Castles of England, 349 Mackery End, 183, 194 Mackintosh, Sir James, 187, 303, 310 Macleane, Arthur John (1812-1858), 487 MacLennan, John Ferguson (1827-1881), Primitive Marriage, 348 Macleod, Norman (1812-1872), 472 Macmillan, Hugh (1833-1903), 472 Macnish, Robert (1802-1837), 450 Macpherson, David (1746-1816), 517 James, Ossian, 40 Macready, William Charles, 171 Madden, Sir Frederic (1801-1873), 356, 517 Madeline, in Keats's Eve of St Agnes, 86 ff. 'Maga.' See Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine Magi, the. 275 Maginn, William (1793-1842), 123, 157 ff., 428 Mahony, Francis Sylvester ('father Prout') 123, 138 Maia, in Keats's Ode to Maia, 90 Maidment, James (1795?-1879), 358, 517 Maidstone, 165 Maine, Sir Henry James Sumner (1822 -1888), Ancient Law, 348; Village Communities, 348 Maistre, Joseph de, 254 Maitland club, 358, 359 - Richard, lord Lethington, 27 SamuelRoffey ( 1792-1866),367,522 Malcolm, James Peller (1767-1815), 507 Malfi, duchess of, in Webster's drama, 68 Mallet, Paul Henri, Northern Antiquities, 368 Malone, Edmund, 365 Maltby, Edward (1770-1859), 327, 487 Manchester, 337, 366 Chetham library, 369 John Rylands library, 365 Owens college, 333 University, 369 Manfred, in Byron's drama, 45, 47 Mannering, Julia, in Scott's Guy Mannering, 22 Manning, Anne (1807-1879), 450 - Henry Edward (1808-1892), 275, 276, 458 - Owen (1721-1801), 344, 511 - Thomas, 181, 187 ff. Manningtree, Essex, 305 Mansel, Henry Longueville, 289 Mansfield park, in Jane Austen's novel, 241 Mant. Richard (1776-1848), 420552 In dex o Manzoni, Alessandro, I promessi Sposi, 254 Marino Faliero, in Byron's drama, 49 Marlborough school, 332 - George Spencer, 5th duke of, 365 Marlow-on-Thames, 61, 62 Marmion, lord, in Scott's poem, 10 ff. Marriott, Charles (1811-1858), 261, 274, 458 Marryat, Frederick (1792-1848), 451 Jacob Faithful, 250 Japhet in search of a Father, 250 Masterman Ready, 251 Mr Midshipman Easy, 251 Peter Simple, 250 Settlers in Canada, 251 Marsh, Herbert (1757-1839), 280, 468 Marston moor, 13 Martin, Robert, in Jane Austen's Emma, 240 Martineau, James (1805-1900), 468; A Study of Religion, 298; Types of Ethical Theory, 298 Marvell, Andrew, 202 Mary, the Virgin, 291 queen of Scots, 21, 27, 350 Maryland, 350 Marys, 'the four,' 27 Mason, Peter Hamnett (1827-1912), 341, 501 Massachusetts, 165 Massinger, Philip, 68 Masson, Charles, 'Memoir on the Topes,' 352 David, 206 Massorah, the, 341 Mathesis, 114 Mathias, Thomas James, The Pursuits of Literature, 364 Maturin, Charles Robert, Women, or Pour et Contre, 146 Maupassant, Guy de, 244 Maurice, Frederick Denison (1805-1872), 283, 288, 289 ff. (main entry), 295, 296, 468, 469; Prophets and Kings, 284; Religions of the World, The, 289; Theological Essays, 284, 290 Mavrocordatos, prince Alexander, 38 Mayfield, 103 Mayne, John (1759-1836), 420 Mayor, John Eyton Bickersteth (1825 -1910), 326, 357, 487, 488, 523; First Greek Reader, 336; Juvenal, 336 Joseph Bickersteth, 523 Meath, county, 351 Medea, in Euripides's drama, 68 Medhurst, Walter Henry (1796-1857), 342, 500 Mediterranean sea, 32, 257 Medwin, Thomas, 50, 54; Journal of the Conversations of Lord Byron, 36 Melrose abbey, 9, 46 Melvill, Henry (1798-1871), 472 Melville, Sir Robert, 27 Memorie of the Somervilles, 16 Mephistopheles, 50, 54

f NAames Mercury, in Shelley's Prometheus Unbound, 65 Meredith, George, 24 Merivale, Charles (1808-1893), 313, 476, 477 Autobiography, 307 Conversion of the Northern Nations, The, 306 Conversion of the Roman Empire, The, 306 Fall of the Roman Republic. The, 305 General History of Rome, 306 History of the Romans under the Empire, The, 305 Merivale, Herman (1806-1874), 305; 'Lyall's Travels in North America,' 153 - John Herman (1779-1844), 420 Merrilies, Meg, in Scott's Guy Mannering, 18, 25, 29 Mesolonghi, 38, 314 Meyrick, Sir Samuel Rush (1783-1848), 511 Michael, in Byron's Vision of Judgment, 53 Michaelis, Johann David, Introduction to the New Testament, 280 Middleton, John Henry (1846-1896), 498 - Thomas, The Changeling, 222; The Witch, 190 Milan, 220 Milbanke, Anne Isabella. See Byron, lady Mill, James, 152, 301, 309, 430 John Stuart, 275, 285, 289 William Hodge (1792-1853), 341 Milligan, William (1821-1893), 469 Milman, Henry Hart (1791-1868), 211, 317 ff., 322, 477 Annals of St Paul's, 319 History of Christianity, The, 318 History of Latin Christianity, The, 317 History of the Jews, The, 318 Milne, William (1785-1822), 342 Milner, Isaac (1750-1820), 281 Joseph (1744-1797), 472; History of the Church of Christ, 281 Milnes, Richard Monckton. See Houghton, lord Miltiades, 363 Milton, John, 85, 86, 94, 106. 133, 136, 137, 145, 168, 169, 177, 208, 210, 303 Comus, 68 L'Allegro, 89 Lycidas, 74 Methought I saw, 91 Nativity Ode, 90 Paradise Lost, 48, 84, 102 Paradise Regained, 98 Samson Agonistes, 68 Miranda, in Shakespeare's Tempest, 54 Mitchell, Sir Arthur (1826-1909), 511 Thomas (1783-1845), 488 Mitford, John (1781-1859), 420 -Mary Russell, 239, 242 William, 302, 313; History of Greece, 310Index of Names

553

Mivart, St George (1827-1900), 469 Modus Tenendi Parliamentum, 355 Mohammedanism, 191 'Mohock Magazine, the,' 160, 161 Moir, David Macbeth (1798-1851), 451; The Curate of Suverdsio, 252; The Life of Mansie Wauch, 251 Moira, Lord, 103 Molikre, J. B. P. de, Don Garcie de Navarre, 211 Moloch, 36 Momerie, Alfred Williams (1848-1900), 469 Mommsen, Theodor, 306, 322 Moneta, in Keats's The Fall of Hyperion, 86 Monier-Williams, Sir Monier (1819-1899), 343. 503 Monk, James Henry (1784-1856), 327 ff., 488; Life of Bentley, 329 Monod, Adolphe, 283 Monro, Charles Henry (1835-1908), 488 David Binning (1836-1905), 488; Grammar of the Homeric dialect, 334 Edward (1815-1866), 472 Montaigne, Michel Eyquem, seigneur de, 168, 174, 175 Montalembert, Charles Forbes de, 276 Montgomery, James (1771-1854), 420; Go to dark Gethsemane, 135; Songs of praise the angels sang, 135 - Robert (1807-1855), 420; Satan, 129; The Omnipresence of the Deity, 129 Monthly Magazine, The, 428 Repository, The, 428 - Review, The, 428 Montrose, James Graham, 1st marquis of, 21 Moore, Arthur William (1853-1909), 512 -- Dugald (1805-1841), 420 Thomas (1779-1852), 34, 42, 44, 74, 95, 102 if. (main entry), 110, 115, 120, 122, 126, 129, 130, 136, 138, 150, 163, 223, 303, 410 At the mid hour of night, 105 Corruption, 104 Epicurean, The, 104 Fables for the Holy Alliance, 40 Fudge Family, The, 104, 105 I saw from the beach, 105 Intolerance, 104 Irish Melodies, 4], 102, 105 Lalla Rookh, 102, 105 Last Rose of Summer, The, 105 Life of Lord Byron, 53, 103 Loves of the Angels, The, 48, 102 Minstrel Boy, The, 105 National Airs, 105 Oft in the stilly night, 105 'Paradise and the Peri,' 105 'Phelim Connor' letters, 104 Poems, 103, 104 Poetical works of the late Thomas Little, 103 Two-Penny Post Bag, The, 105 Morcelli, Stefano Antonio, 326

More, Hannah, 124; Cheap Repository Tracts, 281 Morell, Thomas, Thesaurus, 327 Morgan, lady (Sydney Owenson) (1783?1859), 451 -Thomas, 512; Romano-British Mosaic Pavements, 347 Morier, James Justinian (1780?-1849), 451 Morland, Catherine, in Jane Austen's Northanger Abbey, 235, 236 Morley, Henry (1822-1894), 504 Morning Chronicle, The, 171, 183, 187, 323 Post, The, 187, 188 Morris, Charles (1745-1838), 420 Richard (1833-1894), 504; Specimens of Early English, 344 William, 275 Morrison, Robert (1782-1834). 342, 500 Morton, Henry, in Scott's Old Mortality, 27 Morwenstow, 134 Moses, 299 Moslems, 45 Moss, Joseph William (1803-1862), 523 Motherwell, William, 6 Moulton, William Fiddian (1835-1898), 501 Moultrie, John (1799-1874), 420 Mounier, Jean Joseph, 144 Moxon, Edward (1801-1858), 200, 201, 222, 421 -- Mrs Emma (born Isola), 200 ff. Mozley, James Bowling (1813-1878), 256, 261, 273, 459 Thomas (1806-1893). 459; Reminiscences, 273 Miiller, Friedrich Max, 314, 502, 503; Lectures on the Science of Language, 343 - Karl Ottfried, 300; History of Greek Literature, 331; The Doric Race, 301, 312 Muir, William (1799-1860), 498 Munro, Hugh Andrew Johnstone (1819 -1885), 327, 337, 488; Criticisms and Elucidations of Catullus, 335; Translations into Latin and Greek Verse, 335 Mure. William (1799-1860), Critical History of the Literature of Ancient Greece, 339 Murray, Alexander Stuart (1841-1904), 498 - avid. 520; Bibliography: its Scope and Methods, 363, 370; David Laing, 350, 358; R. and A. Foulis, 324 -Sir James Augustus Henry (1837 -1915), 505 - - John, 34, 47, 52, 149 ff., 154, 155, 161; Memoir of, 150 Sir John Archibald, lord Murray, 144 L indley (1745-1826), 505 Museum Criticum, 329 Musgrave, Tom, in Jane Austen's The Watsons, 234 Musgrove, Louisa, in Jane Austen's Persuasion, 241 -- Mr and Mrs Charles, in Jane Austen's Persuasion, 240554

Index of Names

Myers, Frederic (1811-1851), 469 Myrrha, in Byron's Sardanapalus, 49 Napier, Macvey (1776-1847), 147. 153, 162, 427 Naples, 36, 63 Napoleon I, emperor of the French, 38, 39, 61, 164, 166, 178, 192, 237, 300, 343 Nares, Robert (1753-1829), 505 Navy Records society, 355 Neale, John Mason (1818-1866), 277, 353, 459; Theodora Phranza, 273 Neil, Robert Alexander (1852-1901), 489 Neilson, George (b. 1858), 512 Nether Stowey, 166, 203 Netherlands, United Provinces of the, 316 Nettleship, Henry (1839-1893), 489; Contributions to Latin Lexicography; 337; Essays, 337 Neuha, in Byron's The Island, 46 New river, the. 182, 198 - South Wales, 194 Spalding club, 359 Sydenham society, 355 New English Dictionary, 293 - Monthly Magazine, The, 161. 200, 429, 431 - Times, The, 198 Newark castle, 7 Newcastle, 346 Newcome, Ethel, in Thackeray's The Newcomes, 130 Newdigate prize poem, 138 Newman, Francis William (1805-1897), 469 John Henry (1801-1890), 178, 253 ff., 264, 265, 266 ff. (main entry), 272 ff., 276, 285, 287, 292, 299, 430, 454, 455, 459 ff. Apologia pro vita sua, 266 ff Callista, 277 Development of Christian Doctrine, An Essay on the, 269 Dream of Gerontius, The, 257, 268 Grammar of Assent, A, 269 'Lead kindly Light,' 269 Lectures on the Prophetical Office of the Church, 269 Loss and Gain, 277 'Praise to the Holiest,' 269 Scope and Nature of University Education, The, 269 Sermons for Mixed Congregations, 268 Thoughts on the Ministerial Commission, 258 Tract XC, 260, 294 Newstead priory, 31, 39 Newton, Sir Charles Thomas (1816-1894), 340, 498; Essays in Art and Archaeology, 339 Nicaea, council of, 278, 321 Nichol, John (1833-1894), 505 Nicholas, Thomas (1820-1879), 512 Nichols, John (1745-1826), 512 Bibliotheca Topographica. 345 History and Antiquities of Leicester, 345

Illustrations of the Literary History of the Eighteenth Century, 345 Literary Anecdotes, 345 Nichols. John Bowyer (1779-1863), 345 John Gough (1806-1873), 345 Nicholson, William (1782?-1849), 421 Nicolas, Sir Nicholas Harris, 303 Niebuhr, Barthold Georg, 280, 287, 305 ff., 310, 321; Griechische Heroengeschichten, 310; History of Rome, 288, 301 ff. Nigel, in Scott's Fortunes of Nigel, 19 Nineveh, 339 Noel, Baptist Wriothesley (1798-1873), 472 Norfolk, 153, 323, 346 Norham castle, in Scott's Marmion, 10 Norman conquest, the, 261, 322 Normans, the, 26, 316 Norris, Edwin (1795-1872), 352, 512 -- Mrs, in Jane Austen's Mansfield Park, 239, 243 North British Review, The, 429 North Walsham, Norfolk, 323 North, Christopher. See Wilson, John Northcote, James, 172 -James Spencer (1821-1907), 512 Northumbrian coast, 10 Norwich, 87 Notes and Queries, 354, 370 Novello, Vincent, 201 Numismatic society, 347 Nutt, Alfred Triibner (1856-1910), 518 Oakeley, Frederick (1802-1880), 259, 461 Ochiltree, Edie, in Scott's Antiquary, 25, 350 O'Curry, Eugene (1796-1862), 518; Manners and Customs of the Irish, 360; Manuscript Materials for Ancient Irish History, 360 O'Doherty, in Noctes Ambrosianae, 160 O'Donovan, John (1809-1861), 518; Grammar of the Irish Language, 360 Old English charters, 356 language, 326, 355 Old English Chronicle, 349 Old Testament revision company, 341 Oldbuck, Jonathan, in Scott's Antiquary, 25, 350 Oliver, J. R., 512 Ollier, Charles, Literary Miscellany, 74 brothers, publishers, 194 Olympus, 90 O'Neil, Henry (1817-1881), 512 O'Neill, Eliza (lady Becher), 69, 171 Ordella, in Fletcher's Thierry and Theodoret, 190 Oriental scholars, 341 ff., 499 ff. Orientius, 337 Origen, Hexapla, 341 'Orinda.' See Philips, Katherine Orme, William (1787-1830), 523 Ormerod, George (1785-1873), 512 Osbaldistone, Francis, in Scott's Rob Roy, 17, 18, 26 Osborne, lady, 285 lord, in Jane Austen's The Watsons, 234Index of Names

555

Ossian, 12, 40 Ossianic society, 361 Othello, in Shakespeare's play, 171 Ottery St Mary, 191 Otway, Thomas, 49 Ouseley, Sir Gore (1770-1844), 342, 502 Sir William (1767-1842), 342, 502 Outram, George (1805-1856), 421 Overreach, Sir Giles, in Massinger's New Way to pay old Debts. 171 Overton, John (1763-1838), 472 Ovid, Ibis, 337 Owenson, Sydney. See Morgan, lady Oxford, 59, 115, 138, 143, 157, 158, 187, 192, 256, 259 ff., 271, 273, 274, 277, 278, 285, 286, 288, 293 ff., 299, 304, 317, 318, 320, 327, 328, 333, 339 ff., 365 Balliol college, 259, 260, 298, 333, 334 Bodleian library, 334, 369 Camden professorship of history, 317, 328 Christ Church, 327, 328, 333, 339, 341, 354 Christchurch meadows, 158 Clarendon press, 328, 337 Exeter college, 260, 333, 334 Indian institute, 343 Lincoln college, 333 Magdalen college, 158, 260, 278, 327 hall, 343 Merton college, 234 Oriel college, 107, 255 ff., 271. 274, 284 ff., 290, 292, 295, 334, 337 Professorship of Anglo-Saxon, 344 - Chinese, 343 Comparative Philology, 343 Ecclesiastical History, 321 ---  Latin, 337 Poetry. 260, 265 Sanskrit, 343 Regius professorship of Greek, 328 St Mary's church, 257, 259, 266, 268 Trinity college, 133, 265 Wadham college, 330, 334 Oxford Essays, 294 Oxford historical society, 355 liberals, the, 290, 292 -movement, the, 253 ff., 453 ff. Padua, 63 Paget, Francis Edward (1806-1882), 277, 461 Paine, Thomas, 279 Palaeographical society, 356 Palestine, 320 Paley, Frederick Apthorp (1815-1888), 331, 489 - William, 154, 279, 280 Palgrave, Francis Turner, 115, 132 Palmer, Arthur (1841-1897), 338, 490 Edward Henry (1840-1882), 342, 499 Edwin, 337 - John, 341 Miss, niece of Sir Joshua Reynolds, 132

Palmer, William (1803-1885), 258, 461 - William (1811-1879), 461 Palmers, the, in Jane Austen's Sense and Sensibility, 236 Panizzi, Sir Anthony (1797-1879), 368 Papal States, 36 Paris, 103, 198, 365; the Louvre, 166 Matthew. Historia Minor, 356 Mrs, 200 Parker society, 355 - John Henry (1806-1884), 498 Parr, Samuel (1747-1825), 325 ff., 363, 490, 523; Memoirs, 325 'Parson Lot' (Charles Kingsley), 291 Pascal, Blaise, 272 Patent Rolls, 355 Pater, Walter Horatio, 271, 277 Paterculus, Gaius Velleius, 337 Paterson, Samuel (1728-1802), 363, 523 Patmore, Coventry K. D., 275 Patras, gulf of, 38 Pattison, Mark (1813-1884), 255, 292, 334, 469; Essays on Scaliger, 333; Isaac Casaubon, 333; 'The Tendencies of Religious Thought,' 295 Paul, saint, 285, 293 Pauline epistles, the, 298 Peacock, Thomas Love, 60, 63, 255; The Four Ages of Poetry, 74 Pecock, Reginald, 134 Peebles, Peter, in Scott's Redgauntlet, 25 Peel, Sir Robert, 154 Pegasus, 101, 104 Peile, John (1838-1910), 490 Thomas Williamson (1806-1882), 490 Pelham, Henry Francis (1846-1907), 477; History of the Roman Empire, 317; Outlines of Roman History, 317 Pennethorne, John, 340 Penrith, 188 Penrose, Francis Cranmer (1817-1903), 498; Principles of Athenian Architecture, 340 Perceval, Arthur Philip (1799-1853), 258, 461 Percy society, 353, 355, 368, 369 Thomas, Reliques of Ancient Poetry, 4, 6, 133. 354 Perdita, in Shakespeare's Winter's Tale, 87 Pericles, 313 Perry, James, 323 John Tavenor, 512 Persia, 342 Persian language and literature, 327, 342, 362 Persius, 222, 337 Peterborough, 166, 329 Peterloo affair, the, 69 Petrarch, 217; Trionfi, 76 Petrarchian rime form, 81, 91 Petrie George (1789-1866), 512 Antiquities of Tara, 351 Ecclesiastical Architecture of Ireland, 351 Irish Military Architecture, 351 Round Towers of Ireland, 351556

Index of Names

Petrie, Henry (1768-1842), 355, 356, 518 William Matthew Flinders, 339 Petrograd, 55 Pettigrew, Thomas Joseph (1791-1865), 523; Life of Lord Nelson, 367 Phalaris, 324 Phelps, William (1776-1856), 512 Philanthropist, The, 193 Philips, Katherine ('Orinda'), 124 Philodemus. 340 Philological Museum, The, 308 Philological society, 344 Phoenicia, 316, 317 Photius (codex Galeanus), 325, 328 Phraxanor, in Wells's Joseph and his Brethren, 117 Phyllis, 133 Pickersgill, Joshua, The Three Brothers, 50 Piers Plowman, 344, 354 Pindar, 330; Paeans, 340; Partheneia, 340 Pindaric odes, 128 Pinkerton, John (1758-1826), 518 Pisa, 37, 70, 72, 75; palazzo Lanfranchi, 36 Pitt, William, the younger, 260 Pitt-Rivers, Augustus H. L. F. (1827 -1900), 512 Planche, James Robinson (1796-1880), 512; History of British Costume, 348 Plato, 60, 67, 93, 284, 293 Euthydemus, 327 Gorqias, 327, 330 Phaedo, 333, 335 Phaedrus, 330 Republic, The, 333 Symposium, 62, 73 Theaetetus. 329 Timaeus, 333 Plautus, Miles Gloriosus, 338 Playfair, John (1748-1819), 144 Pliny, Letters, 336 Plumers, the, 182 Plutarch, Lives, 332, 335 Polar seas, the, 248 Polidori, J. W., 247 Pollen, John Hungerford (1820-1902), 462; A Narrative of Five Years at St Saviour's, Leeds. 275 Pollok, Robert (1798-1827), 421; The Course of Time, 129 Polycarp, 340 Poole, Reginald Stuart (1832-1895), 498 Pope, Alexander, 36, 40, 100, 145, 169, 177, 218, 363 Augustls, To, 42 Dunciad, The, 41, 42 Epistle to Arbuthnot, 42, 73 Song by a Person of Quality, 101 Porcher, Edwin A., 339, 498 Porphyro, in Keats's Eve of St Agnes, 86, 87 Person, Richard (1759-1808), 323 ff. (main entry), 329 ff., 363, 490 ff. Adversaria, 329 Aristophanica, 328 Letters to Travis, 323 Miscellaneous Works, 324

'Porson' type, 324, 329 Porteous mob, the. 18 Portsmouth, 243 Portugal, 32 Portuguese, the, 13 Poste, Edward (1823-1902), 492 Potiphar, 117 Potter's bar, 186 Poundtext, Peter, in Scott's Old Mortality, 27 Poussin, Nicolas, 173 Powell, Baden (1796-1860), 295, 469 Power, John, 523 Praed, Winthrop Mackworth (1802-1839), 107, 108, 111-12 (main entry), 119 ff., 129, 130, 138, 421 Arminius, 111 Gog, 111 Goodnight to the Season, 122 I enter thy garden of Roses, 122 Josephine, 111 Letter from Teignmouth, 122 Letter of Advice, 122 MIolly Mog, 122 Red Fisherman, The, 111, 112 Tales, 111 Time's Song, 111, 112 Twenty Eight and Twenty Nine, 122 Vicar, The, 122 Prague, 206 Preraphaelite school of painting, 154 Price, Fanny, in Jane Austen's Mansfield Park, 235, 238, 239, 243 -- William, in Jane Austen's Mansfield Park, 239 Priestley, Joseph, 165, 174, 183, 279 Pringle, Thomas (1789-1834), 421 Prinsep, James (1799-1840), 512; Benares illustrated, 352; Essays on Indian Antiquities, 352, 353 Prior, Matthew, 120, 223 Procter, Bryan Waller, 'Barry Cornwall' (1787-1874), 115, 129-30 (main entry), 201, 421; Sit down, sad soul, 130; Song for Twilight, 130 Proctor, Robert George Collier (1868 -1903), 523; Bibliographical Essays, 369; Index of Early Printed Books, 369; The Printing of Greek in the Fifteenth Century, 369 Prometheus, in Shelley's poem, 64 ff. Proserpine, 339 Prospero, 220 Prout, father. See Mahony, Francis Sylvester Prussian protestantism, 260 Psyche, in Keats's Ode to Psyche. 90 Pughe, William Owen (1759-1835), 518 Pulci, Luigi, 51, 52, 56; Morgante Maggiore, 35 Punic war, the second, 303 Purcell. E., Life of Ambrose de Lisle, 276 Purser, Louis Claude, 338 Pursuits of Literature, The, 364 Pusey, Edward Bouverie (1800-1882), 253, 254, 261 ff. (main entry), 271 ff., 462Index oj Commentary on the Minor Prophets, 341 Entire Absolution of the Penitent: A Sermon, 263 Lectures on the Prophet Daniel, 341 Spiritual Letters, 264 Thoughts on the Benefits of the System of Fasting, 258 Pye, Henry James (1745-1813) Alfred, 128, 133, 422 Commentary illustrating the Poetic of Aristotle, 128 Comments on the commentators of Shakespear, 128 Summary of the duties of a J.P., 128 Quaritch, Bernard, 523; General Catalogue 368 Quarterly Review, The, 141, 142, 149 ff. (main entry), 162, 163, 193, 194, 199, 288. 302, 364, 429 Quillinan, Edward (1791-1851), 422 Quintilian, 220, 326 Quintus Smyrnaeus, 331 Rabelais, Frangois, 123, 168 Racine, Jean, 47 Radcliffe, Ann, 58, 249; Mysteries of Udolpho, The, 235 Raine, James (1791-1858), 354, 512 John, 354 Ramdyana, the, 343 Ramsay, William (1806-1865), 492 Raphael Sanzio, 172 Rashleigh, in Scott's Rob Roy, 21, 26 Rask, Rasmus Christian, Anglo-Saxon Grammar, 344 Ravenna, 34, 35, 48 ff., 324 Ravenswood, in Scott's Bride of Lammermoor, 23 Rawlinson, George (1812-1902), 316, 334, 477, 478; The History of Herodotus, 317 Sir Henry Creswicke (1810-1895), 316, 317, 342, 499 Record, The, 258 Record commission, 357 Reculver, 347 Redhouse, Sir James William (1811 -1892), 342, 504 Reeve. Henry, 153 Reeves, William (1815-1892), 518; Ecclesiastical Antiquities of Down and Connor, 361 Reflector, The, 192, 193 Reid, John (1808-1841?), 523 Rembrandt van Ryn, 172, 173 Renouf, Sir Peter Ie Page (1822-1897), 500 Retrospective Review, The, 346, 430 Revett, Nicholas (1720-1804), 499 Reynolds, John Hamilton (1796-1852), 70, 82, 89, 422 Sir Joshua, 132, 166, 172 Rhadamanthus, 136 Rhind lectures in archaeology, 351 -- Alexander Henry (1833-1863), 512; Thebes, its Tombs and their Tenants, 351

f Names 557 Rhine, the, 33 Rhodes, 339 Rich, Anthony (1804-1891), 512 Richard III, in Shakespeare's play, 171 Richardson, Jonathan, 172 Samuel, 168, 231 if., Pamela, 235; Sir Charles Grandison, 238 Richborough. 347 Richmond, Legh (1772-1827), 472; The Dairyman's Daughter, 281 Rickman, John, 188 Riddell, James (1823-1866), 492 Rigby, in Disraeli's Coningsby, 155 Rigveda, the, 343 Ritchie, Leitch (1800?-1865), 451 Ritson, Joseph (1752-1803), 523 Bibliographia Poetica, 363 Collection of all the Songs etc. on Robin Hood, 364 Observations on Warton's History of English Poetry, 363 Select Collection of English Songs, 364 Rob Roy (Robert Macgregor), in Scott's novel, 18, 26 Robertson, Eben William (1815-1874), 512 F rederick William (1816-1853), 290ff., 469; 'On the Glory of the Virgin Mother,' 291 - George Groom, 309 Joseph (1810-1866), 513, 518; Illustrations of the Topography...of Aberdeen and Banff, 359 William, 142, 300 William A. S. (1836-1897), 513 Robin Hood, 3 Robinson, Henry Crabb, 167, 201 Roby, Henry John (b. 1830), 492 Elementary Latin Grammar, 336 Essays on the Law of Cicero's Private Orations, 337 Introduction to Justinian's Digest, 337 Latin Grammar from Plautus to Suetonius, 336 Roman Private Law, 337 Rochdale, 31 Roderick, Visigothic king, 211 Roger, count of Sicily, 316 Rogers, Charles, 515 H  enry (1806-1877), 472, 473; 'The Religious Movement in Germany,' 153 - Samuel (1763-1855), 36, 95 ff. (main entry), 101, 102, 124, 133, 139, 148, 150, 408 'Campagna of Rome, The,' 98 Italy, 96, 98 Jacqueline, 96 Pleasures of Memory, The, 41, 96, 97, 100 Table Talk, Porsoniana, 325 Rolleston, George (1829-1881), 513 Rolliad, The, 120 Rolls series, 336, 356 Romagna, the, 36 Romaine, William (1714-1795), 473 Roman antiquities, 346, 347, 350 catholic doctrine, 261, 270558

Index of Names

Roman catholics, 259, 260, 267, 271, 273, 275, 276 law, 335 studies, society for the promotion of, 340 wall, the, 346 Romans, the, 249, 316 Rome (state), history of, 280, 301 ff., 322 - (city), 50, 63, 67, 76, 92, 257, 273, 302, 340 church of, 259, 261, 262, 264, 269, 274, 276, 292, 299, 331 Romeo, in Shakespeare's play, 54 Romilly, John Romilly, lord (1802-1874), 356 Rosabelle, in Scott's Lay of the Last Minstrel, 9 Rosalind, in Shelley's Rosalind and Helen, 62 Rose, Hugh James (1795-1838), 254, 256, 272, 454, 462 William Stewart (1775-1843), 422 Rossetti, Christina Georgina, 119, 276, 277; Sleep at Sea, 128 - Dante Gabriel, 87, 92, 119, 154, 275 Rosslyn, Alexander Wedderburn, 1st earl of, 142 Rotuli de oblatis et finibus, 355 - Normanniae, 355 Round Table, the, 354 Rousseau, Jean Jacques, 44, 76, 164, 168, 177, 178 Routh, Martin Joseph (1755-1854), 260, 327, 462; Reliquiae Sacrae, 278. 327 Roxburghe Ballads, The, 368 Roxburghe club, 357, 365 -- John Ker, 3rd duke of, 365 Royal Archaeological institute, 349 - Asiatic society, 352 - Historical and Archaeological association of Ireland, 351 Irish academy, 351, 352 society of Antiquaries of Ireland, 352 society of London, 319 See, also, under Society Ruddiman, Thomas, 350 Rugby school, 288, 302, 304, 328 Ruhnken, David, 325 Rushworth, Mr, in Jane Austen's Mansfield Park, 239, 241 Ruskin, John, 173, 177, 178, 372 Russell, lord John Russell, 1st earl, 319; 'Earls Grey and Spencer,' 153 Russia, 46, 55 Rutherford, William Gunion (1853-1907), 492; The New Phrynichus, 334 Rylands, Mrs John, 365 Ryle, John Charles (1816-1900), 473 Rymer, Thomas, Foedera, 355 Sabrinae Corolla, 329 Sacred Books of the East, 343 Sadler, Sir Ralph, Life, Letters and State Papers, 16

St Albans, 182 St Andrews, 359; United college, 259 St Catharine's convent, mount Sinai, 341 St Davids, see of, 308 St Preux, 60 Sainte-Beuve, Charles Augustin, 211 Salamenes, in Byron's Sardanapalus, 49 Salisbury, 192 Robert A. T. Gascoyne Cecil, 3rd marquess of, 155 Sallust, 306 Salt, Samuel, 180, 181, 183, 189, 191 Salzmann, Auguste, 339 Sampson, Dominie, in Scott's Guy Mannering, 25 Samuel, 321 Sanskrit language and literature, 318, 327, 343, 352, 362 Sappho, 329 Sardanapalus, in Byron's drama, 49 Sargent, John Young (1829-1915), 493 Satan, in Milton's Paradise Lost, 48- 85 Saturday Review, The, 306 Saturn, in Keats's Hyperion, 85 Savory, Hester, 194 Saxe Coburg, house of, 232 Saxons, the, 26 Sayings of the Fathers, 341 Scardassale, Tomasso, 55 Scarth, Harry Mengden (1814-1890), 513 Schiller, Johann Friedrich Christoph von, 4, 7, 90, 168, 254 Schlegel, August Wilhelm von, 169 Schleiermacher, Friedrich Daniel Ernest, 343; A Critical Essay on the Gospel of St Luke, 280, 288, 289, 308 Scholefield, James (1789-1853), 329, 473 'Scorpion, The' (J. G. Lockhart), 154, 158 Scotland, 1, 6, 12, 18, 30, 129, 142, 143, 156, 161, 167. 251, 337, 344, 349 ff., 357 ff., 370; court of exchequer, 350; Free church, 296 Scots Acts, The, 357 Scots, lowland, 24 Scott, Hew (1791-1872), Fasti Ecclesiae Scoticanae, 359 John (1783-1821), 161, 163 Michael (1789-1835), 451 Robert (1811-1887), 333. 487 Thomas (1747-1821), 281, 473 -- Sir Walter (1771-1832), 1 ff. (main entry), 34, 45, 46, 51, 57, 62, 95, 101, 102, 112, 120, 122, 125, 126, 128. 131, 133, 138, 144, 147, 150, 155, 157, 161 ff., 168, 170, 205, 212, 213, 223, 230, 237, 241, 245, 249 ff., 254, 255, 266, 300, 303, 357, 358, 367, 370, 372 ff., 513 Abbot, The, 26, 29 Albert Graeme, 7, 9 Allan a Dale, 14 Antiquary, The, 29, 151, 350 Apology for Tales of Terror, 5 Black Dwarf, The, 156 Bonnie Dundee, 14 Border Antiquities, 16Index of Bridal of Triermain, The, 13 Bride of Lammermoor, The, 22 Brignal Banks, 14 County Guy, 14 Donald Caird, 14 Doom of Devorgoil, The, 13 Eve of St John, The, 7 Fortunes of Nigel, The, 18 Gray Brother, The, 7 Guy Mannering, 18, 21, 151 Hail to the Chief, 12 Halidon Hill, 13 Harold the Dauntless, 13 Heart of Midlothian, The, 17, 18 Ivanhoe, 26 Kinmont Willie, 6 Lady of the Lake, The, 11, 12 Lay of the Last Minstrel, The, 7 ff., 14, 14i Legend of Montrose, The, 29 Life of Napoleon, 16 Lord of the Isles, The, 13 Love Wakes and Weeps, 14 Macduff's Cross, 13 Macgregor's Gathering, 14 Marmion, 9 ff., 42, 149, 365 Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border, 6, 7, 364 Old Mortality, 18, 21, 22, 27 One Volume More, 364 Otterbourne, 6 Pibroch of Donald Dhu, The, 14 Poetical Works, 364 Prefatory Memoir to Sterne, 366 Proud Maisie, 14 Quentin Durward, 26 Rebecca's hymn, 14 Redgauntlet, 18, 21, 26, 29 Rest, Warrior, Rest, 12, 14 Rob Roy, 17, 29 Rokeby, 12, 13, 105 Sun upon the Weirdlaw Hill, The, 14 Tales of a Grandfather, 16 Tales of my Landlord, 151 Tragedy of Auchindrane, The, 13 Vision of Don Roderick, The, 13 Waken Lords and Ladies Gay, 14 Wandering Willie's Tale, 22, 29 Waverley, 26, 151 Waverley novels, 251 Weary Lot, A, 14 When Israel of the Lord Beloved, 14 Young Lochinvar, 14 Works edited by, 16 Scottish antiquities, 25. 351 ballads, 125, 358 bar, 143 book-clubs, 355, 357, 359 dialect, 125 divines, 284 novels, 25 ff., 30 poetry, 14, 45, 358 theology, 296 Scottish Historical Review, The, 358 Scottish Text society, 344, 359 Scotts of Eskdale, the, 9 Scrivener, Frederick Henry Ambrose (1813-1891), 340, 501

C Names 559 Scylla, in Keats's Endymion, 82 Seebohm, Frederic (1833-1912), 513; The English Village Community, 348; The Tribal System of Wales, 348 Seeley, Sir John Robert (1834-1895), 469, 493; Ecco Homo, 154, 297 Robert Benton (1789-1886), 473 Selborne, Roundell Palmer, 1st earl of, 261 Selden society, 355 Selkirkshire, 5 Sellar, William Young (1825-1890), 493; Roman Poets of the Republic, 337 Semitic peoples, 296 Seneca, 49 Senior, Nassau William, 'European and American State Confederacies,' 153 Septem contra Christum, 294 Sertorius, in Robert Landor's Fawn of Sertorius, 230 Seton, George Seton, 5th lord, 27 Henry, in Scott's Abbot, 27 Mary, 27 Severn, Joseph, 92 Seward, Anna (1747-1809), 124, 422 Sewell, Elizabeth Missing (1815-1906), 462 W- illiam, 462 Seyton, Catherine, in Scott's Abbot, 22, 27 Shairp, John Campbell, 259 Shakespeare, William, 23, 24 30, 40, 49, 68, 70, 83, 88, 91, 93, 98, 106, 108, 111, 120, 168, 169, 171, 177, 186, 189 if., 196, 211, 218, 243, 268, 280, 331, 347, 369 The Perkins folio, 368 'Full fathom five,' 191 Hamlet, 170 In me thou see'st, 92 King Lear, 94, 170 Macbeth, 94 Othello, 170 Richard III, 150 The Tempest, 191 Shakespeare society, 355, 368, 369 Shakespearean scholars, 344 Shandon, captain, in Thackeray's Pendennis, 159 Sharp, Granville (1735-1813), 473 James, archbishop of St Andrews, 22 Sharpe, Charles Kirkpatrick (1781?-1851), 150, 430, 518 W illiam, engraver, 323 Shaw, Stebbing (1762-1802), 513 Sheffield, 136 Shelley, Mrs (Harriet Westbrook), 59, 62 -- Mrs (Mary Wollstonecraft Godwin), 35, 37, 59, 61, 62, 64, 71, 76, 451, 452 Frankenstein, 247, 248 Last Man, The, 248 Lodore, 248 Valperga, 248560

Index of Names

Shelley, Percy Bysshe (1792-1822), 33 ff., 37, 39, 44, 56. 57 ff. (main entry), 79, 89, 91, 92, 94, 106, 107 112, 113, 115, 119, 120, 126, 136, 138, 139, 157, 162; 174, 179, 180, 199, 205, 219, 222, 247, 248, 399 Adonais, 71, 73 ff., 78, 87, 93 Alastor, 58, 59, 70, 71 Apollo, Hymn of, 72 Arethusa, 72 Aziola, 75 Castlereagh Administration, Lines written during the, 40 Cenci, The, 61, 68 ff., 213 Charles 1, 75 Christianity, On, 60 Cloud, The, 71, 72, 75 Cosimo and Fiordispina, 71 Daemon of the World, The, 59 Defence of Poetry, The, 74, 75, 78 Edward Williams, Lines to, 75 Epipsychidion, 73, 74 Euganean Hills, Lines written among the, 63 Future State, On a, 60 Hellas, 75 Intellectual Beauty, Hymn to, 59, 60 Julian and Maddalo, 34, 62, 63 Laon and Cythna, 61 Liberty, To, 72 Life, On, 60 Lord Chancellor, To the, 62 Love, On. 60 Maria Gisborne, Letter to, 62, 73 Masque of Anarchy, The, 69 Medusa, 58 Mercury, Hymn to, 71 Metaphysics, On, 60 Mont Blanc, 60 Morals, On, 60 Naples, To, 72 Napoleon's death, Lines on, 75 Orpheus, 71 Pan, Hymn of, 72 Peter Bell the Third, 70 Prince Athanase, 61 Prometheus Unbound, 58, 65 ff., 70 Queen Mab, 59, 60 Revolt of Islam, The, 59, 61 Rosalind arnd Helen, 62 St Irvyne's, 59 Sensitive Plant, The, 70, 71 Skylark, To a, 70, 72, 77 Stanzas written in dejection, near Naples, 63 Swellfoot the Tyrant, 70 Tasso, 64 Translation of Plato's Symposium, 73 Triumph of Life, The. 58, 76 Vision of the Sea, A, 71 West Wind, Ode to the, 72 When the lamp is shattered, 75 William Shelley, To, 62 Witch of Atlas, The, 71 Zastrozzi, 59 Shenstone, William, 132 Shepherd, R. H., 35

Sheridan, R. B., 49 Shilleto, Richard (1809-1876), 312, 330, 493 Shippen, William, 174 Shirley, James, 190 Shore, mistress, in Praed's Red Fisherman, 112 Shorthouse, Joseph Henry, John Inglesant, 277 Shortreed, Robert, 4 Shrewsbury Chronicle, The, 174 Shrewsbury school, 328, 329, 331, 333, 335, 336, 339 Shropshire, 166, 346 Shuckburgh, Evelyn Shirley (1843-1906), 493 Shylock, in Shakespeare's Merchant of Venice. 171 Sicily, 316 Siddons, Mrs Sarah, 171 Sidgwick, Henry (1838-1900), 469 Sikes, Thomas, 256 Silvestre, J. B., Universal Palaeography, 356 Simcox, George Augustus (1841-1905), 493 William Henry (1843-1889), 493 Simeon, Charles (1759-1836), 281, 473 Simpson, Sir James Young (1811-1870), 513; Archaeological Essays, 350 Sinai, mount, 341 Sinker, Robert (1838-1913), 370, 523 Sir Tristrem, 7 Skeat, Walter William (1835-1912), 505; Etymological Dictionary of the English Language, 344 Skene, James, of Rubislaw, 26 W illiam Forbes (1809-1892), 518 Skiddaw, 188 Skimpole, Harold, in Dickens's Bleak House, 205 Skye, 13 Slingsby, Sir Henry, Civil War Memoirs 16 Sloperton, 103 Smith, Adam, 142 Alexander, Life Drama, 114 - Alfred Charles (b. 1822), 513 Charles Roach (1807-1890), 513; 'Antiquarian Notes' (Gentleman's Mag.), 346; Retrospections, 347 - George (1840-1876), 499; Chaldaean Genesis, 342 Harriet, in Jane Austen's Emma, 240 Horatio ('Horace') (1779-1849), 442; Rejected Addresses, 120 James (1775-1839), 422; Rejected Addresses, 120 James Elimalet (1801-1857), 473 John (1747-1807), 518 John Pye (1774-1851), 469 John Russell (1810-1894), 523 - John Thomas (1766-1833), 513 Joseph, 523 Lucy Toulmin (1838-1911), 518 - rs, in Jane Austen's Persuasion, 240Index of Names

561

Smith, Reginald Bosworth (1839-1908), 316, 478 - Sir Robert Murdoch (1835-1900), 339, 498 - Robert Payne (1819-1895), 341, 503 - Sydney, 143, 144, 146, 281 - Sir William (1813-1893), 493 Dictionary of Christian Antiquities, 335 Dictionary of Christian Biography, 317, 335 Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities, 335 Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography, 317, 335 Dictionary of Greek and Roman Geography, 317. 335 Dictionary of the Bible, 317, 335 Latin Dictionary, 335 Smith, William Henry (1808-1872), 469, 470 William Robertson (1846-1894), 342, 470; The Old Testament in the Jewish Church, 296; The Prophets of Israel, 296 Smollett, Tobias George, 2, 30, 231, 245, 246, 250, 251 Socialism, 290 Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge, 307 Society of Antiquaries, 345, 347 - Antiquaries of Scotland, 349 - Dilettanti, 338 See, also, under Royal Socinianism, 287 Socrates, 309, 313 Somers, John Somers, lord, Collection of Tracts, 16 Somersby, 39 Sophocles, 68, 328, 332, 333, 338, 340; Oedipus Coloneus, 327; Oedipus Tyrannus, 327, 329 Sophron, 329 Sotheby, William (1757-1833), 128, 422 Sotherton, in Jane Austen's Mansfield Park, 241 Southampton, 232 Southey, Mrs Caroline Anne, born Bowles (1786-1854), 124, 127, 414; The Mariner's Hymn, 128 Charles Cuthbert 219 -- Robert, 42, 59, 95, 96, 98, 101, 107, 111, 113, 120, 122, 124, 133, 135, 136, 138, 150, 154, 158, 164, 167, 179, 182, 186, 205, 208, 210, 214 ff., 219, 268, 303, 364 Colloquies, 215, 230 Old Woman of Berkeley, The, 111, 123 Specimens of Later English Poetry, 132 Thalaba, 145 Vision of Judgment, A, 36, 53, 54, 199 Spain, 32, 42, 149 Spalding club, 359 John, History of Scotland, 359 Spanish bull-fight, 43 - language and literature, 13, 157 272, 308 E. L. XII.

Spanus, in Robert Landor's Fawn of Sertorius, 230 Spectator, The, 140, 193, 223, 231 Spencer, Herbert, 275 -- John George Spencer, 2nd earl, 365, 366 -- William Robert (1769-1834), 131, 422 Spenser, Edmund, 3, 86, 93, 168, 177, 208, 221, 272; Epithalamion, 79; Faerie Queene, The, 44, 61, 79, 87 Spenserian stanza, the, 11, 44, 74, 100, 138 Spezia, bay of, 37, 75, 76 Spinoza, Baruch, 60 Spottiswoode society, 358, 359 John, History of the Church and State of Scotland, 359 Spratt, Thomas Abel Brimage (1811 -1888), 339, 498 Spurgeon, Charles Haddon (1834-1892), 473 Stael, Madame de, 282 Stanley, Arthur Penrhyn (1815-1881), 153, 264, 283, 288, 295, 319, 320-1 (main entry), 470, 478 Epistles of St Paul to the Corinthians, 292 Lectures on the Church of Scotland, 321 Lectures on the Jewish Church, 294 Life of Arnold, 320 Memorials of Canterbury, 321 Memorials of Westminster Abbey, 321 Oxford lectures, 321 Sinai and Palestine, 321 Stanley, Thomas, 324, 328 Stationers' company, Register, 357, 368 Statius, 306 Statuta Ecclesiae Scoticanae, 359 Staubach, the, 47 Steele, Sir Richard, 177 sisters, the, in Jane Austen's Sense and Sensibility, 237, 240, 243 Steevens, George, 365 Stephen, Sir James, 153, 282 - Sir Leslie, 131, 431; Half Hours in a Library, 148 Stephens, Catherine, countess of Essex, 171 - George (1813-1895), 513 Sterling, John, 288 Sterne, Laurence, 56, 124, 177, 250 Stesichorus, 329 Stevenson, John Hall, 120 - Joseph (1806-1895), 356 - Robert Louis, 30, 168, 176, 178, 179 Steventon, Hampshire, 231 Stewart dramatists, 198 Dugald, 4 Stillingfleet, Edward, 259 Stobaeus, 328 Stoddart, Sarah. See Hazlitt, Mrs Stokes, Margaret McNair (1832-1900 518 - Whitley (1830-1909), 518; The saurus Palaeo-Hibernicus, 361 36562

Inzdex of Names

Stonehenge, 192 Story, Robert (1795-1860), 423 Stoughton, John, 473 Stow, John, 349; Survey of London, 354 Strachan, John, 519; Thesaurus PalaeoHibernicus, 361 Stratford-on-Avon, 369 Strauss, David Friedrich, Life of Jesus, 292 Strong, Sandford Arthur (1863-1904), 499 Struthers, John (1776-1853), 423 Strutt, Joseph (1749-1802), 519 Stuart, James (1713-1788), 499 John (1813-1877), 513; The Book of Deer, 350; The Sculptured Stones of Scotland, 350 -- Robert (1812-1848), 513; Caledonia Romana, 350 Stubbs, William (1825-1901), 271, 273 Suckling, Alfred Inigo (1796-1856), 513 Suetonius, 306 Suffolk, 198, 256, 331 Suidas, 328 Suliotes, 39 Sumner, John Bird (1870-1862), 473 Surtees society, 354 Robert (1779-1834), 6, 513; History of Durham, 354 Sussex, Augustus Frederick, duke of, 367 Swain, Charles (1801-1874), 423 Swainson, Charles Anthony (1820-1887), 478 - William (1789-1855), 523 Sweet, Henry (1845-1914), 505 Swift, Jonathan, 20, 55, 56, 120, 164, 168, 175, 177; Works, 16, 372 Swinburne, Algernon Charles, 117, 130, 154, 208, 209, 218, 219, 268, 275 Switzerland, 33 if., 41, 44, 59, 60, 247, 311, 315 Sydenham, 102 society, 355 Thomas, 355 Sydney, 330 Sykes, Sir Mark Masterman, 365 Symons, Arthur, 132 Syriac language and literature, 341, 342 Tacitus, 306 Tait, Archibald Campbell, 260 Tait's Edinburgh Magazine, 430 Talfourd, Sir Thomas Noon, 201, 211; Ion, 113 Talma, Frangois Joseph, 198 Tamil language, 362 Tamworth manifesto, the, 154 Taoist classics, 343 Tartarus, 217 Tasso, Torquato, 50, 64 Tatler, The, 140, 193 Taylor, Charles (1840-1908), 341, 501 - Sir Henry (1800-1886), 107, 112-13 (main entry), 211, 423 Edwin the Fair, 112, 113 Isaac Comnenus, 112 Minor Poems, 113 Philip van Artevelde, 112, 113

'Quoth tongue of neither maid nor wife,' 113 St Clement's Eve, 112 Taylor, Isaac (1829-1901), 470, 505 James W., 513 Jeremy, 169, 176, 193, 253, 277, 283 John, publisher, 195, 203 William, of Norwich, 4, 97 Teazle, Lady, in Sheridan's School for Scandal, 171 Telegu language, 362 Telfer, Jamie, of the Fair Dodhead, 3 Temple, Frederick (1821-1902), 'The Education of the World,' 295 Tennyson, Alfred Tennyson, 1st lord, 39, 63, 106, 113, 118, 126, 139, 154, 219, 271 Demeter, 332 In Memoriam, 116, 330 Poems (1842), 101 The Voyage of Maeldune 361 Tennyson, Charles. See Turner, Charles Tennyson Term Catalogues, 357 Terni, cataract of, 44 Terry, Charles Sanford, 519; Catalogue of publications of Scottish Historical Societies, 358 Thackeray, William Makepeace, 21, 24, 109, 121 ff., 125, 128, 131, 178, 250, 252, 430, 431; Lords and Liveries, 246; Novels by Eminent Hands, 246; Pendennis, 159 Thames river, 265 Themistocles, 363 Theocritus, 330, 331 Theodoric the great, 322 Theophrastus, Characters, 332 Thirlwall, Connop (1797-1875), 280, 288, 302, 303, 307 if. (main entry), 318, 470, 478; History of Greece, 308; Letters to a Friend, 309; 'On the Irony of Sophocles,' 308 Thomas, Edward (1813-1886), 352, 513; Ancient Indian Weights, 353 Thompson, A. Hamilton, Military Architecture during the Middle Ages, 349 William Hepworth (1810-1886), 330, 331, 494 Thoms, William John (1803-1885), 519; Anecdotes and Traditions, 354 Thomson, George, Scottish Airs, 372 - James, 131, 132, 136, 177; Castle of Indolence, The, 100 John, 144 - Thomas (1768-1852), 357 ff., 518 Thorbiorga, in Taylor's Edwin the Fair, 113 Thoreau, Henry David, 166, 176 Thornton, Henry (1760-1815), 281, 473 Thorpe, Benjamin (1782-1870), 344, 505; Yule-tide Stories, 368 - Isabella, in Jane Austen's Northanger Abbey, 236 Thorpes, the, in Jane Austen's Northanger Abbey, 236Index of Names

563

Thucydides, 303, 330, 333, 338 Tiberius, emperor of Rome, 306 Tickler, Timothy, in Noctes Ambrosianae, 160 Tighe, Mrs Mary (1772-1810), 423 Tillotson, John, 259 Tilney, Henry, in Jane Austen's Northanger Abbey, 234, 236 Times, The, 171, 273, 315 Titans, the, in Keats's Hyperion, 85 Titian, 172, 173, Titus, emperor of Rome, 249 Tod, James (1782-1835), 513; Antiquities of Rajpootana, 352 Todd, James Henthorn (1805-1869), 360, 519; St Patrick, Apostle of Ireland, 361 Tolstoy, count Leo, 250 Tooke, John Home (1736-1812), 494; The Diversions of Purley, 326 Toronto university, 351 Torquil, in Byron's The Island, 46 Toup, Jonathan (1713-1785), 494; Emendations on Suidas, 324 Tourneur, Cyril, 116 Tracts for the Times, 256, 257, 276 Trajan, emperor of Rome, 303 Travis, George, Letters to Gibbon, 323 Tregelles, Samuel Prideaux (1813-1875), 340, 501 Trelawny, Edward John (1792-1881), 38, 76, 452; Recollections of...Shelley and Byron, 37 Tremebundus (Charles Lamb), 200 Tremulus (Charles Lamb), 200 Trench, Melesina (1768-1827), 452 Richard Chenevix (1807-1886), 271 ff., 463 Trent, council of, 260 Trinity, the, 283 Trollope, Anthony, 245 -Augustus, 245 Frances (1780-1863), 245, 452; The Vicar of Wrexhill, 246; The Widow Barnaby, 246 Troy, 338 Tuck, friar, in Scott's Ivanhoe, 18 Tufnell, Henry, 301 Tulloch, John, 286 Turkey, 42 Turkish language and literature, 342 Turks, the, 38, 45 Turnbull, Thomas, in Scott's Redgauntlet, 21 Turner, Charles Tennyson, 119 - Joseph M. W., 173, 346 - Sharon (1768-1847), History of the Anglo-Saxons, 344 Turton, Thomas, 325 Tweed, river, 11 Twining, Thomas (1735-1804), 494 Tyne, river, 10 Tyrol, the, 369 Tyrrell, George (1861-1909), 470; Nova et Vetera, 299 Robert Yelverton (1844-1914), 338, 494 Tyrwhitt, Thomas (1730-1786), 494

Tytler, Alexander Fraser, Roman History, 301 Una, in Spenser's Faerie Queene, 87 Upcott, William (1779-1845), 507 Urania, 74, 114 Valckenaer, Lodewyk Kaspar, 325 Valens, emperor of the eastern Roman empire, 322 Valentinian, emperor of Rome, 322 Vaughan, Robert Alfred (1823-1857), 470 Vaux, William Sandys Wright (1818 -1885), 513 Veitch, William (1794-1885), 494 Venice, 33 if., 49, 52, 63, 365 Venn, Henry (1725-1797), 473 -- John (1759-1813), 281 Vergil, 67, 76, 326, 329, 337 Vernon, Diana, in Scott's Rob Roy, 17, 22, 26 lady Susan, in Jane Austen's Lady Susan, 233 Verona, congress of, 38 Verrall, Arthur Woollgar (1851-1912), 332, 333, 494 Versailles, 185 Victoria, queen of Great Britain, 292, 311 Victoria County Histories, 346 Victorian writers, 95, 106, 177 Vienna, congress of, 39 Viking club, 355 Vincent, William (1739-1815), 495 Vinet, Alexandre Rodolphe, 283 Vittoria, in Webster's The White Devil, 68 Viviani, Emilia, 73, 74 Vogan, Thomas Stuart Lyle, 473 Volpone, in Ben Jonson's play, 68 Voltaire, F. M. A. de, 177, 206, 208 Wace, Henry, 317 Wade, Thomas (1805-1875), 107, 423; Jew of Arragon, The, 119; Mundi et Cordis...Poems and Sonnets, 119 -- Sir Thomas Francis (1818-1895), 343, 500 Wakefield, Gilbert (1756-1801), 470, 495; 'Diatribe,' 326 Wakeman, William F., 513 Walcott, Mackenzie Edward Charles (1821-1880), 348, 513, 520; History of the Cathedrals...of Scotland, 349; Traditions and Customs of Cathedrals, 349 Waldegrave, Samuel (1817-1869), 473 Waldens, the, of Edmonton, 201 Wales, 166, 344, 349; church of, 266 Wallace Craigie, near Dundee, 350 Waller, A. R., 167 - Edmund, 132 Walpole, Horace, earl of Orford, 345; Castle of Otranto, The, 3 Waltham, 186 Ward, Harry Leigh Douglas (1825-1906), 519564

Index of Names

Ward, Robert Plumer (1765-1846), 452 -Wilfrid, Life of Newman, 257 - William George (1812-1882), 259, 271, 275, 463; The Ideal of a Christian Church, 261, 276 Wardour, Isabella, in Scott's Antiquary, 22 Ware, Hertfordshire, 182 Sir James, 349 Waring, Edward John, 523 Warne, Charles (1802-1887), 513 Warr, George Charles Winter (1845-1901), 495 Warren, Samuel (1807-1877), 452 Warter, John Wood, 219 Warton, Thomas, the younger, 133; History of English Poetry, 363 Warwickshire, 326 Waterloo, battle of, 43 Watkin, William Thompson (1836-1888), 514; Roman Cheshire, 347; Roman Lancashire, 347 Watson, Emma, in Jane Austen's The Watsons, 234 - Joshua, 256 - Richard, 279, 280 Watt, Robert (1774-1819), 523; Bibliotheca Britannica, 370; Catalogue of Medical Books, 370 - of Harden, 3 Watts, Alaric Alexander (1797-1864), 423 Waverley, Edward, in Scott's novel, 18, 22, 151 Way, Albert (1805-1874), 519 Weale, John (1791-1862), 523 W. H. J., 523 Weber, Henry William (1783-1818), 358, 519 Webster, John, 68, 116; The White Devil, 191 Wedderburn, Alexander. See Rosslyn, earl of Wedgwood, Hensleigh (1803-1891), 506 Weimar, 38, 158, 302 Wellesley, Sir Arthur. See Wellington, duke of Wellington college, 333 - Arthur Wellesley, duke of, 97, 154 Wells, Charles Jeremiah (1799?-1879), 107, 424; Joseph and his Brethren, 117 Welsh language, 308 Wem, Shropshire, 165, 166 Wentworth, captain, in Jane Austen's Persuasion, 240, 242 Wesley, John, 259, 278 Westbrook, Harriet. See Shelley, Mrs Westbrooks, the, 62 Westcott, Brooke Foss (1825-1901), 298, 340, 470 Westminster and Foreign Quarterly Review, The, 430 -- Review, The, 152, 307, 310, 318, 351, 430 Westropp, Hodder M. (d. 1884), 514 Westwood, John Obadiah (1805-1893), 514  Thomas, 201

Whately, Richard (1787-1863), 242, 243, 285 ff., 292, 470, 471; Historic Doubts relative to Napoleon Buonaparte, 285; Letters on the Church, 285 Wheeler, Stephen, 206 Whetstone, George, Life of Sir Nicolas Bacon, 357 Whistlecraft, Mr (J. H. Frere), 52 Whitaker, Thomas Dunham (1759-1821), 345, 514; History of Richmondshire, 346 Whitby, 10 White, Henry Kirke (1785-1806), 424; Oft in danger, oft in woe, 136; The Star of Bethlehem, 136 James, 438; The Falstaff Letters, 183, 185 - Joseph Blanco (1775-1841), 471 - Thomas Pilkington, 514 Whitefriars, his eminence of, in Scott's Fortunes of Nigel, 21 Whitehead, Charles (1804-1862), 107, 424 As yonder Lamp in my Vacated Room, 119 Cavalier, The, 119 Jack Ketch, 119 Richard Savage, 119 Solitary, The, 118 Whitehead, Paul, 118 - William, 118 Wickham, Edward Charles (1834-1910), 495 Widford, Hertfordshire, 182, 186 Wight, isle of, 188 0. W., 371 W-illie of Aikwood, 3 Wilberforce, Henry William (1807-1873), 274, 463 - Robert Isaac (1802-1857), 454,455, 463; The Doctrine of the Incarnation, 274 - Samuel (1805-1873), 473 -William (1759-1833), 282, 473; A Practical View of Christianity, 281 Wilde, Sir William Robert Wills (1815 -1876), 351, 514 Wilkes, John, 54 Wilkie, Sir David, 177 Wilkins, Augustus Samuel (1843-1905), 337, 495 - Sir Charles (1749?-1836), 343, 503 Henry Musgrave (c. 1822-1887), 495 Wilkinson, Sir John Gardner (1797-1875), 317, 500; Manners and Customs of the Ancient Egyptians, 342 William I, king of England, 31 of Malmesbury, 355 Williams, Sir Charles Hanbury, 120 -Edward Ellerker, 76 George (1814-1878), 514 H-elen Maria, 124 - Isaac (1802-1865), 258, 261, 265-6 (main entry), 424, 454, 455, 463; Autobiography, 266; On reserve in communicating religious knowledge, 260; The Cathedral, 266Index of Names

565

Williams, Jane, 73, 75, 76 John (Ab Ithel) (1811-1862), 514 Rowland (1817-1870), 295, 471; Psalms and Litanies, 296 murders, the, 227 Willingham, lady Maria, in Mrs Gore's Mothers and Daughters, 246 Willis, Robert (1800-1875), 514; Architectural History of...Cambridge, 348 Wilson, Caroline (1787-1846), 473 - Sir Charles William (1836-1905), 514 Daniel (1778-1858), 473 Sir Daniel (1816-1892), 514; Archaeology and Prehistoric Annals of Scotland, 351; Prehistoric Man, 351 - Henry Bristow (1803-1888), 471; The Communion of Saints, 284; 'The National Church,' 295 -- Horace Hayman (1786-1860), 343, 503; Ariana Antiqua, 352, 353 - John, 173 - John ('Christopher North') (1785 -1854), 156 ff., 425; City of the Plague, The, 158; Isle of Palms, The, 158; Noctes Ambrosianae, 159, 160 - John Mackay (1804-1835), 452, 453 - Thomas, 268 - Walter, 201 -William (1801-1860), 424 Wilton, 192 -- Ralph de, in Scott's Marmion, 11 Wiltshire, 345 Winchester, 231, 327, 348 - Elhanan, 471 Winchilsea, Anne, countess of, 124 Windele, John (1801-1865), 519 Windermere lake, 158 Windsor, 59 -- castle, 345 Winterslow, Wiltshire, 167, 192 Wiseman,Nicholas Patrick Stephen (1802 -1865), 259, 260, 264, 274-5 (main entry), 352, 463; Fabiola, or the Church of the Catacombs, 275, 277; 'High Church Claims,' 275 Wodrow society, 359 Robert, History of the Sufferings of the Church of Scotland, 359 Wolcot, John ('Peter Pindar'), 7, 120 Wolf, Friedrich August, 28, 300; Prolegomena ad Homerum, 301 Wolfe, Charles(1791-1823), 424; Remains, 138; The Burial of Sir John Moore, 122, 138; To Mary, 138 Wolfram, Beddoes's Dirge for, 116 Wollstonecraft, Mary. See Godwin, Mrs Wood, John Turtle (d. c. 1888), 514 Woodbridge, Suffolk, 198

Woodhouse, Emma, in Jane Austen's Emma, 239, 243 James (1735-1820), 424 Mr, in Jane Austen's Emma, 240 Worcestershire, 350 Wordsworth, Christopher (1774-1846), 329 Christopher (1807-1885), 340, 495 Dorothy, 193, 194 -John (1843-1911), 496 William, 39, 44, 57 ff., 61, 63, 77, 81, 93, 94, 100, 101, 106, 107, 110, 112ff., 118, 119, 126, 139, 147, 158, 162, 166, 170, 174, 176, 177, 179, 181, 188, 192, 200, 201, 205, 208, 213, 214, 218, 219, 255, 266, 527 Excursion, The, 59, 79, 146, 193 Extempore Effusion on the Death of James Hogg, 95 Immortality, Ode on, 84 Lyrical Ballads, 40, 42 Peter Bell, 70 Prelude, The, 83 Tintern Abbey, 80 Venetian Republic, On the extinction of the, 46 Worsley, Philip Stanhope (1835-1866), 334 Worth, Richard Nicholls (1837-1896), 514 Wright, John (1805-1843?), 424 - Thomas (1810-1877), 347, 353, 365, 514 Anecdota Literaria, 354 Biographia Literaria of the Anglo-Saxon period, 354 Early English Poetry, 354 Original Letters, 354 Wright, William (1830-1889), 342, 499 -- William Aldis (1831-1914), 331, 341, 502 Wroxeter, 347 Wyclif society, 355 Xanthian marbles, 339 Xenophon, 313, 332, 339 Yarmouth, 362 Yates, James (1789-1871), 515; Textrinum Antiquum, 348 - Mr, in Jane Austen's Mansfield Park, 239 Yonge, Charlotte Mary (1823-1901), The Heir of Redclyffe, 277; The Little Duke, 277 Yorkshire, 12, 246, 281 Younger, John (1785-1860), 424 Zama, 303 Zarina, in Byron's Sardanapalus, 49 Zend language, 343 Zola, ISmile, 55Qtamnbribge: PRINTED BY JOHN CLAY, M.A. AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS